Full text of "Copies of EMS interviews related to 9/11/01 (Released via New York Times FOIA request)"
See other formats
File No. 9110003 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
CHIEF MARK STEFFENS 

Interview Date: October 3, 2001 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



M. STEFFENS 2 

MR. McALLISTER: I'm McAllister from 
the Bureau of Administration. We're 
interviewing Chief Mark Steffens of Division 
1, formerly the commanding officer at the 
Office of Medical Affairs. The date of the 
interview is October 2nd, 200 1 . It is now 
2:47 p.m. This conversation is taking place 
in conference room 8E13 at Fire Department 
headquarters. 

I'm also joined by — 

MR. CAMPBELL: Patrick Campbell, fire 
marshal. 

MR. STERACE: Fire Marshal Michael 
Sterace. 

MR. McALLISTER: And Chief Mark 
Steffens. 

Q. Chief Steffens, I'd like to draw your 
attention to the date of September the 1 1th, 
2001, and I'd like for you, in your own words, to 
describe your experiences from that day. 

A. I normally start work at 9:00, so 8:50 
I was still home showering, getting ready for 
work. I saw what happened on the television 
going on. I heard what happened. I saw 



M. STEFFENS 3 

initially the first tower on fire. 

I got dressed as fast as I could. I 
got into my department vehicle, and I proceeded 
all the way to the Kosciusko Bridge down the BQE. 
My next recollection is being on the FDR Drive. 
I don't remember how I got from the BQE to the 
FDR Drive. 

My next recollection is I'm coming down 
the FDR Drive. I get down to about the Staten 
Island ferry terminal, and I couldn't get any 
further. Civilians were running everywhere. 
There was smoke in the air, and the white powder 
was in the air. I think only the first tower had 
dropped at that point. 
Q. Had dropped? 

A. The people who were running, they said 
the first tower had dropped already. So I would 
imagine this is probably like about ~ I'd say 
somewhere between 9:15 and 9:30, thereabouts, by 
the time I got into Manhattan. 

I abandoned my vehicle at about the 
Staten Island ferry terminal. I pulled over 
there, by where they have the chopper pads on the 
East River. I abandoned my vehicle. I put a 



M. STEFFENS 4 

mayday on the radio that I was abandoning my 
vehicle because I did not have a portable radio 
with a charged battery at that time. 

So I got out. I was on foot. I was 
heading up South Street to Division 1 on foot. 
That was as far as I got. Coming down South 
Street was Jerry Bacchus, who was the ALS 
coordinator for the EMS command. He picked me 
up. 

Q. He was in a vehicle? 

A. He was in a suburban. He had the 
suburban stocked with medical supplies. He 
picked me up, because I was on foot at that time. 
I got in the suburban with Jerry Bacchus. We 
went down the drive, under the hole, out onto 
West Street. We got up to about the Brooklyn 
Battery Tunnel. 

When we got to the Brooklyn Battery 
Tunnel, about that point on West Street, there 
was a Port Authority cop standing there. They 
were shouting, "The tower's going to come down. 
The tower's coming down. You've got to get out 
of here." 

Q. What were you able to observe at that 



M. STEFFENS 5 

time around there? 

A. Black smoke. Black smoke and people 
running everywhere. A lot of fire apparatus on 
both sides of West Street. I didn't see any 
guys, just apparatus. I saw some stretched lines 
and things like that. 

So we continued to drive into the smoke 
cloud. We got to maybe one block north of where 
the Battery Tunnel exits onto West Street there, 
and then, boom, a massive explosion. Right in 
front of us we saw what looked like a fireball 
and smoke. It was rolling this way. 

I said, "Jerry, we've got to get out of 
this fucking car." I'm afraid — 

Q. That's okay. 

A. I'm afraid ~ so we bailed out of the 
truck. 

Q. This is your recollection. 

A. We bailed out of the suburban. We went 
underneath it. The thing blew over us. I had my 
turnout coat on. I put my face in my helmet. 
The thing blew over us. I felt heat. I felt all 
kinds of debris and stuff hitting my body. 
When I opened my eyes, it was 



M. STEFFENS 6 

pitch-black. I closed my eyes again. I was 
praying. When I opened my eyes a second time ~ 
and it feels like each one of these instances was 
a long period of time, but I don't know how long 
it was. 

When I opened my eyes a second time, it 
was like skiing in a blizzard. It was just 
white, a sea of white, and everything blowing all 
around. So I felt okay. "Jerry, we've got to 
get out of here." 

We got out from under the vehicle. We 
got back in the vehicle. We jumped over the 
divider and started driving back down West Street 
to the battery. We got to battery ~ we put the 
vehicle up against where that old fortress is 
right by the Holocaust memorial. There's an old 
fortress right where the Statue of Liberty ferry 
terminal is. 
Q. Sure. 

A. We put the vehicle up against that 
wall, and each one of us climbed into one of 
those cubbyholes. 

Then there was another it sounded like 
an explosion and heavy white powder, papers, 



M. STEFFENS 7 

flying everywhere. We sat put there for a few 
minutes. It kind of dissipated. We pulled the 
vehicle out, right down to the battery. We 
turned on the emergency lights, and it became a 
casualty collection point. 

Q. Had you been in radio contact from the 
time you were on West Street? 

A. The last radio contact was when I 
maydayed when I bailed out of the vehicle. No 
other radio contact after that point. 

Q. There wasn't a radio in the suburban? 

A. There was a radio in the suburban, but 
I don't recall that we were using it. We were 
running at that point. We were coming down West 
Street. One of the EMS guys was running. He was 
just dressed in blue, covered in soot, bleeding 
from under the face like this. We grabbed him. 
We threw him in the back of the suburban. We 
pulled down to West Street. 

When the smoke and all of that 
dissipated, we turned on the lights. It became a 
casualty collection point there. All the EMS 
people were running down West Street. They 
collected by our vehicle. 



M. STEFFENS 8 

All kinds of vessels, barges, little 
small pleasure craft, everything was just pulling 
up to the dock, and we were putting civilians — 
there was one police lieutenant ~ I don't know 
his name. He did a fantastic job. And we just 
evacuated as many civilians onto these boats and 
sent them to Jersey. 

My guys established that casualty 
collection point. We were doing eye washes and 
boo-boos and giving out whatever masks we had to 
civilians and to cops like that. We were there 
for what seemed like a couple of hours at the 
battery until the point there was nobody left, 
just the emergency service people. 

At that point I became aware of an EMS 
operation that was going on in the Staten Island 
ferry terminal. So I gathered up my guys, and we 
walked on foot to the Staten Island ferry 
terminal, where I was reunited with the other 
folks that established the casualty collection 
point at the Staten Island ferry terminal there. 

I was there for a couple of hours, and 
then we were all directed to report to the 
command post which was at Chambers and West. 



M. STEFFENS 9 

That was early afternoon. We regrouped and were 
given various assignments. I was sent to command 
the Chelsea operation. 

Q. So you think that when you were on the 
drive the smoke you saw was probably from one of 
the aircraft and not from a building? 

A. No, because it wasn't heavy smoke. You 
could smell fire. I know the smell of fire, and 
I have been around long enough. So I recognized 
the smell of fire. But there wasn't all of that 
debris or anything flying around in the air. 
There was just people, people everywhere, people 
running. 

I got to the point where I couldn't go 
any further with my vehicle because there were 
people in the streets, on the drive. So that's 
when I decided to bail out of the vehicle, 
figuring I could make better time on foot. 

Q. Sure. 

A. My thought was let me go to Division 1, 
group whatever I could so we could go to the 
incident site. 

Q. When you were on West Street 
approaching the World Trade Center site, do you 



M. STEFFENS 10 

think that's when the first tower that came down? 

A. I think it was the second tower came 
down, although I don't know for sure. 

Q. Was there a lot of debris while you 
were still going on West Street? 

A. No. 

Q. Powder? 

A. No. A lot of fire apparatus, a lot of 
engine companies like that. 

Q. The street was clean? 

A. It seemed wet. There were stretched 
lines. I didn't see my guys. This seemed weird 
to me, all this apparatus but no guys. There 
were lines stretched on the ground but no guys. 

Q. So it was clear while you were going up 
West Street? 

A. Yes. That's when we heard this massive 
explosion and I saw this thing rolling towards 
us. It looked like a fireball and then thick, 
thick black smoke. 

Q. Is it possible the second one occurred 
while you were in the battery? 

A. The second one had to have occurred 
while we were at the battery, because that's when 



M. STEFFENS 1 1 

all this white stuff started flying around. 

Q. That sounds right. 

A. But the time line ~ I don't know when 
these things actually occurred in real time. I 
was home at 8:50. I had to be in the car before 
9:00. I was just about dressed. I was shaving, 
putting on the finishing touches, when I saw the 
thing on the news. I ran to the car. You can 
look at my unit history in the CAD system, see 
what time I logged on and proceeded down there. 
It took me a while to get down the BQE. 

Q. It seems like there was about a 
45-minute period, between about 9:45 a.m. and 
10:30. 

A. 8:45. 

Q. No, I'm talking about where the both 
the buildings came down. I'm not entirely 
accurate on that, but that's what it seems like 
to me, at the time. 

A. It seemed like the time frame between 
what we saw on West Street and what occurred when 
we were at the battery, it seemed like they 
happened close together. But when I think about 
the things that occurred during that period of 



M. STEFFENS 12 

time, it couldn't have been close together 
because too many things happened. But it seemed 
like they happened very close to one another. 

The whole thing seemed like it happened 
very quickly from getting no further with the 
vehicle so let me just pull this car over and 
bail out, what I can do on foot. I didn't get 
more than a block or two ~ you know where the 
fire station is on South Street? 

Q. Yes. 

A. That's where I was. Jerry picked me up 
right there. We went right into the hole, came 
around up onto West Street. I didn't know what 
the hell ~ when the Port Authority cop tried to 
stop us ~ he waved and said, "No, the building's 
going to come down." 

At that point I wasn't listening to any 
cop. My thought was I've got to go there. My 
guys are there. Then boom and the cloud. I 
didn't want to stay in the vehicle. I was afraid 
that the windows were going to blow out. My 
reflex action was to get underneath it. 

Q. How did the vehicle survive when you 
got out from under the vehicle? 



M. STEFFENS 13 

A. Just covered with soot. It didn't 
blowout any windows or anything like that. I 
guess we weren't close enough. So the vehicle 
survived. It had a lot of powder and stuff on 
the windshield like that. At that point I was 
just grateful to be able to get in and get the 
hell out of there. 

Q. Is there any follow-ups? I want to 
know, did you see anybody on the way that was 
present that you knew besides the guy that picked 
you up, Bacchus? Anybody else? Did you see 
anybody else from the Fire Department? 

A. No. No, I grabbed the one EMS guy. I 
never saw him before. I remember his name is 
Badillo, Benjamin Badillo, an EMT in the Bronx. 
He just came out of the cloud, poor kid, covered, 
bleeding down the face. I grabbed him and said 
get in this truck, and the three of us bailed out 
to the battery. 

Q. Any follow-ups? 

Do you have any other observations, 
Mark? 

A. When I went back to recover my vehicle, 
I recovered my vehicle and caught up with Chief 



M. STEFFENS 14 

Basile and Chief Villani. We were going to go 
look for their vehicles. We drove out onto West 
Street. I came from the Statue of Liberty ferry 
terminal. My car was on the east side, so it was 
fine, it was okay. 

We drove back down again. We weren't 
able to go down the hole. We went onto West 
Street. When we pulled onto West Street, it was 
just like nothing I've ever seen in my life. All 
the apparatus, the fire trucks, everything all 
blown out, the windows were all blown out, body 
parts lying on the street, mud, soot, people 
walking around dazed. 

I saw one proby ~ he had a proby on 
the helmet ~ by himself, walking by himself. I 
tried to get him to come with us. He said, "No, 
no, I've got to go back. I've got to go back." 
We washed his eyes. I gave him something to 
clean his face. Then he turned around and went 
back into the cloud. I never saw him again. 

There were lines stretched ~ 
Q. Do you recall his name? 
A. No. Young, young guy. He had a proby 
on the front of the helmet. 



M. STEFFENS 15 

Q. Any numbers on there? 

A. I can't remember. I can't remember at 
all. I didn't want him to go back, and he 
wouldn't listen to me. I wasn't going to hold 
him back. He walked off. 

Q. That was after the second or after the 
first collapse? 

A. After the second. He just walked back 
into that big, black cloud. 

That's as much as I recall. 

Q. I appreciate your time today. Thank 
you very much. Thanks, Chief. 

A. I'm sorry I couldn't be of more help. 
MR. McALLISTER: It's 3:01 p.m., and 

the interview is now concluded. 



File No. 9110004 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
PARAMEDIC MANUEL DELGADO 
Interview Date: October 2, 2001 



Transcribed by Nancy Francis 



M. DELGADO 

MR. McALISTER: This is Kevin McAlisterfrom 
the Bureau of Administration. It is October 2nd at 
2:03 p.m. We're in conference room 8E13 at Fire 
Department Headquarters, and in a moment we will begin 
interviewing Paramedic Manuel Delgado. I'm here today 
with... 

FIRE MARSHAL CAMPBELL: Patrick Campbell, 
Fire Marshal. 

FIRE MARSHAL STARACE: Michael Starace, Fire 
Marshal. 

MR. McALISTER: Now we'll start with 
Paramedic Manuel Delgado. He's assigned to the Office 
of Medical Affairs. 

Q. Drawing your attention to September the 11th, 
could you describe where you were working that day and 
when you became aware of the World Trade Center 
incident? 

A. It must have been about five to 9:00. I got 
a call from Joe Farrell, who is a DOH rep from the 
Bureau of Emergency Services, the Department of Health, 
calling me saying what's going on at the World Trade 
Center? I had no knowledge of it. I looked 
immediately to the CAD, the computer-aided dispatch 
system, in the computer. I noticed that there was a 



3 
M. DELGADO 



1040, a plane into the World Trade Center. I called 
him back and advised him of such. 

At this point, one of the doctors that was 
here, Dr. Cherson, I advised him of the fact that there 
was a 1040 going on and maybe, you know, it's part of 
our response matrix. 
Q. What's a 1040? 
A. An airplane into a building. 

So I called Commissioner Clair, who at that 
time was up in Albany in a CMAC meeting, let him know 
what was going on, and I told him I would get back to 
him as soon as I got to the scene. Myself, 
Dr. Cherson, and we met up with Dr. Guttenberg, who is 
the EMS fellow in the office downstairs, us three 
proceeded to get in Dr. Cherson's car and drove across 
the Brooklyn Bridge. 

Obviously, when we were driving across the 
Brooklyn Bridge, it was very obvious that there was 
something serious going on at the World Trade Center. 
There was a gaping black hole. It seemed like the 
upper floors, and I don't know exactly - now I know 
through press reports what floor more or less was hit, 
but it looked to me like the top ten floors were fully 
engulfed in smoke at this time. 



4 
M. DELGADO 



Q. How many of the towers were burning; one or 
two? 

A. One. Only one at this time. 

So we went across the Brooklyn Bridge, had a 
little trouble navigating through the traffic, and 
finally arrived at the corner of I believe it's West 
Broadway. Let me look on this map real quick. West 
Broadway and Vesey. 

As soon as we arrived, 84, a massive 
explosion goes off, and at this point we didn't know 
what it was. We thought it was a secondary explosion. 
We didn't know that it was a second plane. In fact, I 
didn't know there was a second plane until much later 
in the evening. 

An explosion goes off. I immediately tell 
everyone to get out of the car and hide somewhere, go 
underneath something. It's interesting because, as we 
were there, there was a police car, I guess, on Vesey, 
on the corner there, and some debris comes down from 
whatever this explosion was, at the time we really 
didn't know, and it just crushes it, I mean, crushes 
the top front of the police car, which really scared me 
at that point. 

Q. Could you tell if it was airplane parts? 



5 
M. DELGADO 



A. It looked like an airplane part afterward, 
yes, it did. It looked like part of an engine. It was 
pretty big. It was probably the size of the hood 
because it kind of hit it, bounced, and then rolled 
off. 

So then at that point we were approached by a 
police officer holding one of his cops with a massive 
evulsion of the forehead. I need the car, I need the 
car. 

Q. What does that mean in layman's terms? 

A. An evulsion is the scalp sort of like was 
peeled back. So there was some heavy bleeding. It was 
worse actually than the injury. She still had her 
consciousness. He says, I need the car, I need the 
car. 

So Dr. Cherson proceeded to West Street to 
the temporary command center at that time. Me, the cop 
and the cop who was injured and Dr. Guttenberg got into 
the car and drove this cop that was injured down to 
Beekman. We drove the cop to Beekman, dropped her 
off. At that point people were being mobilized at the 
hospital itself. 

Dr. Guttenberg and myself then jumped back in 
the car and went back to the site. 



6 
M. DELGADO 



Q. When you say you went back to the site, where 
exactly did you go at that point? 

A. Well, we couldn't get back to where we were 
on Vesey and West Broadway, so we ended up on - now, 
let me look on the map here. Up further. Broadway 
itself, Broadway between, I would say, Fulton and Ann 
Street, I guess it is. Fulton and Ann, yes. We kind 
of left the car there in the middle of the street and 
proceeded to walk down to the West Street command, 
which was a command post at this time. 

When I got back to the command post, I was 
able to secure - because everyone's cell phones seemed 
to be dead at that point. Luckily, one of the 
lieutenants there handed me a cell phone. I was able 
to call Commissioner Clair, who was still in Albany, 
telling him at this point we had a very, very serious 
incident going on, and that I don't know how he and the 
other physicians who were up there could get themselves 
down here as quickly as possible because this was a 
major terrorist attack. So he told me that basically 
the state police were securing a chopper for him and 
the other two physicians to fly them down. That was my 
last communication with him. 

So we were at West command for a while. 



7 
M. DELGADO 



Dr. Cherson moved forward to I believe it was in 
another command post. I don't know what building this 
was. At this point it becomes really crazy. 

Q. Can I ask you a detail question before you 
get there? 

A. Yes. 

Q. The West command, I see it located here on 
the map roughly at the corner of - what is that, Vesey 
and West? 

A. Yes. That looks look Vesey and West, I 
guess? 

Q. Yes. That's the north bridge, I think? 

A. Right. We were just in front of the north 
bridge. 

Q. Could you describe, were you on the east side 
of West Street, the west side? 

A. We were on the west - well, no. I would say 
the east side of West Street. I guess, on the middle, 
there's like a barrier here, sort of like a potted, 
planted barrier before you get to the financial 
district area. So we were all standing there. The 
vehicles or the staging, which is the area where the 
ambulance was set up, was back here on West Street. 

Q. Who was with you at that point in time? 



8 
M. DELGADO 



A. At that point, Dr. Cherson was with me. I 
saw Commissioner Drury showed up at the scene. He was 
with us there for a little while. He was looking for 
Commissioner Gregory. Captain Jace Pinkus from 
Communications was there and an assorted amount of EMS 
Lieutenants and Fire Operations people were around. I 
remember at one point seeing the Mayor. I saw 
Commissioner Von Essen. Really, at that point, I 
really lose sight of what was going on because there 
was an horrific site. I mean, people were starting to 
jump or fall from the top. 

Q. You were able to observe that? 

A. Yes, definitely. We saw them jumping from 
here down and that was really horrific. There was 
nothing you could do for them. We wanted to go in 
after them and they basically told us don't because 
it's very dangerous at this point. 

Somewhere along the line Dr. Cherson was told 
that - and I don't know who relayed this information 
to him. I guess it's Vesey command, but actually it 
was on Church between - I was closer to Cortlandt and 
I don't know what street this is. Dey Street? 

Q. Dey Street. 

A. Actually, that's where the command post was, 



9 
M. DELGADO 



a triage command, and we were told that they were 
getting hammered. So what happened was that myself - 

Q. That was a staging point for medics and EMTs? 

A. Yes, right. Exactly. That's where mainly 
all the medics and EMTs were starting to treat people 
as they were exiting the building. So myself - well, 
first, before that, Dr. Cherson tells Dr. Guttenberg to 
go back to the car and get the weapons of mass 
destruction kit, which is basically the TUPAM, the 
atropine and the narcotics that we carry in case of a 
biological incident. That's what immediately we 
started thinking. So Dr. Guttenberg goes back to the 
car. 

At this point, also, at the north bridge, we 
ran into Dr. Asaeda, who got down there on his own 
response. So Dr. Asaeda was going to set up a command 
over in the lobby of OEM. What building is that, 7? 
Tower 7? 

Q. 7 World Trade Center. 

A. 7 World Trade Center. So Dr. Guttenberg and 
Dr. Asaeda were to set up their command - there were 
already some medics and EMTs in the lobby of 7 World 
Trade Center. So they were going to set up their own 
triage and command center there. Dr. Cherson and 



10 
M. DELGADO 



myself then walked back to the Vesey command. But at 
this point it wasn't right on Fulton. I remember 
Cortlandt more than I do Fulton, although it might have 
been. I don't know. I remember the opening of the 
building and seeing the north tower right in front of 
me. That I remember very clearly. 

We were getting hammered with patients. At 
one point we wanted to move forward and again we were 
told do not. Dr. Cherson made it very clear, don't go 
any more forward because of the bodies and everything 
else that's coming down. 

Q. So now, just stopping you at that point, both 
of the towers are still standing? 

A. Both of the towers are still standing, yes. 

Q. You're looking basically straight at the 
north tower? 

A. Right. 

Q. You're looking across the plaza of the World 
Trade Center? 

A. Yes, right, and people are exiting this way 
in droves. I mean, there was just a stream of people 
running, running, running, and basically at this point 
our triage was, if you're walking, keep walking, and if 
people are being carried or people were falling, we 



11 

M. DELGADO 



would move forward, and we moved forward as much as in 
between towers I believe this was 4 and 5, buildings 4 
and 5. 

Q. That's right. 

A. I know we went in there and helped some 
people come out, some lady, who she ended up in the 
pictures, in a red dress, who was extremely burnt. 
There was another guy who had to have second and third 
degrees over about 80 percent of his body, and he was 
carried out halfway and I guess collapsed or someone 
dropped him and just ran. We picked him up and started 
bringing him out. 

At this point we were getting an influx of 
equipment, LSI) unit, like the logistical support units 
who carry the oxygen and all that stuff. They were 
coming into the area to give us oxygen, to give us 
blankets, and then units were also coming in. But we 
were getting inundated with patients. We had more 
patients than we had ambulances. We were stuffing four 
and five people in an ambulance at this point. I mean, 
it was just to get people out of there with minimal 
treatment. There was nothing you could do. 

Q. At that point in time, did you see anybody 
you knew either from the fire or the EMS side working 



12 
M. DELGADO 



the ambulances? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Who did you see? 

A. Quite a few people. There was Carlos Lillo, 
who I later found out he's deceased. 

Q. Where did you last see Carlos? 

A. Carlos was with me and it's interesting 
because Carlos always had a smile on his face, and 
Carlos has been around for a while, and I remember at 
one point on Church we had like four or five 
critically, critically ill people who were laid out and 
there were people still streaming out, and this is 
after, where we're moving back and forth trying to get 
people in and out, I remember turning and seeing Carlos 
with his helmet and tears pouring down his eyes, and at 
first I thought maybe this guy is overwhelmed, maybe he 
needs to get out of here, you know? I go to him, 
Carlos, what's the matter? What's going on? He says, 
my wife's in there. I said, listen, man. This is 
God's will. You've got to help me with the people. 
Snap out of it. We've got a lot of patients. You've 
got to help me here. So he does and he begins to do 
what he has to do, which is to help me treat people and 
start sorting who is bad and who isn't. 



13 
M. DELGADO 



Now, time, I have no idea, time factor here. 
I don't know what is five minutes, what is two minutes, 
what took ten minutes. I know that a Lieutenant showed 
up with the LSU unit, again, and says, I need help 
getting oxygen out of the back of this vehicle. I 
remember seeing oxygen tanks in a milk crate. 

By the way, the other people who were here 
were Lieutenant Bruce Medjuck, who is from the EMS 
operations, Captain Janice Olszewski. I remember 
seeing - Dr. Cherson was there with me. I lose track 
of who was there really. I mean, I remember Lillo 
because it sort of stuck out in my mind that this man 
was crying so hard and like it kind of - he was out of 
place because I was wondering for a slight moment, I 
said, what's he doing here? He's a Queens unit. But 
at this point I figured everyone was being brought in 
and who knows what the heck is going on. 

Q. Did you lose track of him then or did you see 
him? 

A. Well, it's interesting because I didn't lose 
track of him because I was concerned. I was concerned 
of the fact that he was overwhelmed, I think, by the 
fact that his wife was in the building. 

Oh, you know who else I saw there? Gabe 



14 
M. DELGADO 



Depena. 

Q. Delapena? 

A. Delapena, yes. I saw him also there because 
at one point he goes, Manny, Manny, what's going on? 
He's another one that was searching for his wife 
because I believe his wife was in the tower. 

Q. I think that's right. 

A. Yes. But I tried to keep my eye on Carlos as 
much as I can. I'm dealing with the people that are 
coming out. There's some other people there that I 
don't really know their name. I know their faces. A 
black gentleman that works down for operations also. 
In fact, there's a picture of them both treating that 
lady that I'm talking about with the red dress in one 
of the Time magazines that I forgot his name. It will 
come to me in a minute. But anyway, we're treating. 

I remember at one point or another this 
Lieutenant coming in and asking for help to get the 
oxygen out of the vehicle. I go to help him, and at 
that point I remember not seeing Carlos, and I don't 
know if he was there or not there. But immediately 
once I put the oxygen down, I hear the rumble, and I 
heard a rumble that we thought was another plane. 
That's what immediately everyone said, there's a plane 



15 
M. DELGADO 



coming, there's another plane coming. 

So we all looked up and what we saw was 
tower, I guess, 2, the south tower, begin to do this. 
The top kind of did this and there was a horrendous 
rumble. 

Q. Now, your hand is showing that it's kind of 
tilted in one direction. What direction did it tilt? 

A. It was tilting towards us, so it had been to 
be tilting eastward. 

Q. East? 

A. Maybe southeast. I'm not sure because at 
this point it's total pandemonium. At that point we 
hear the rumble and, you know, this is it. I figure 
I'm dead. I thought this tower was going to topple. 
So I start to run. I remember running - I don't know 
which way I ran. I don't even know what street I ended 
up on to be very honest with you. I ran - it must 
have been either this or Fulton. One of these two. 

Q. Dey Street or Fulton Street? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Do you know if there was a church next to 
you? 

A. I don't know. I know there were stores up 
the block. So I start to run - 



16 
M. DELGADO 



Q. So you definitely headed east; you're just 
not sure down what street? 

A. Yes. I didn't want to go west. I figured 
let me go east. There's a subway station somewhere 
here, so it may have been Fulton maybe? 

Q. Yes, it was. It's a major station there. 

A. I remember seeing that and I remember saying 
I'm not going down there because I don't want to be 
suffocated, I don't want to be suffocated. But as I 
ran, I got knocked down by it seemed like even someone 
punched me in the back, like a blast it seemed. It 
just kind of picked me up and knocked me down. I 
scraped my elbow, I twisted my ankle, my pants got all 
ripped, my glasses got blown off and the helmet came 
off. I get up quickly and all I can see now is just - 
it had to be on Fulton - the blast, this dark cloud 
coming at us, at me anyway, because I don't even know 
who's around me at this point. You kind of lose all - 
I lost all track of time. I lost basically all body 
movements and I was going on, and then we're engulfed 
in the smoke, which was horrendous. 

One thing I remember, it was hot. The smoke 
was hot and that scared me. I've treated in 18 years 
many, many people with smoke inhalation, and I know the 



17 
M. DELGADO 



consequences of inhaling heat. So I got really 
scared. I tried to put my T-shirt over me. That 
didn't work. I couldn't see because my glasses were 
shot. I couldn't see because my eyes were irritated. 
Like one guy said, it was like breathing cotton balls, 
that's what it felt like, because your mouth was just 
full of this shit and your nose, everywhere. I'm 
running - not running because I'm walking now. I'm 
afraid. I'm thinking in my mind I'm going to die of 
suffocation or somebody's going to run me over, because 
you couldn't see your hand in front of you. That's how 
dark it got. I walked into one or two poles. 

Then out of - I don't know. It was God's 
miracle, basically. I don't even know how I ended up 
there. I was on the corner and, as I was telling them 
just before you walked in, I heard a banging and I 
walked towards the banging and there was, as later I 
found out, it was a Fire Marshal and a cop, a detective 
in plainclothes, who were banging, trying to break the 
door down in one of these computer stores on the corner 
there. 

Q. Do you know the marshal's name? 

A. No. He did take our names down, so he should 
have a record of it. I haven't been able to find out 



18 
M. DELGADO 



who he is. So they're banging on the door, and I 
remember telling the cop, you know, you have a fucking 
gun, you have a fucking gun, use it, use it, we're 



Q. Sure. 

A. That's exactly what he does. In between his 
coughing, he takes out his gun and the first bullet 
doesn't break it. Second one, the glass comes down. 
It must have been a thick glass. We were able to get 
inside. 

Q. So he fired off two shots? 

A. Two shots, yes. Then inside there's, I 
guess, like a gate, sort of like the gate that we have 
downstairs in that store, an inside gate. So we see 
that and we're like, oh, shit. So, finally, us three, 
we hold it up and we let the civilians get underneath. 
I think there were one or two of them. There weren't a 
whole lot of them. Or maybe three. I'm not even sure 
at this point. They go under and we hold it for each 
other and we go under and we go into the store. We 
walk up some escalators to the second floor, which 
looked to be like a computer store. We started looking 
for water or anything to wet ourselves to clean off our 



19 
M. DELGADO 



faces because we're all coughing and hacking. We find 
a water fountain and we all basically drink from that 
and wait for the smoke to clear a bit. 

Q. Is the smoke in the building, though? 

A. Yes. And the smoke alarms are going off and 
who knows what else is going off. There's smoke but 
it's not that bad, though, so you could see. It's a 
haze. It's sort of like when you're in a club and you 
see the haze, you know, it's hazy, it's not necessarily 
black, pitch, acrid smoke that was outside. I would 
say about five or six, seven minutes go by while we're 
inside. It seemed like an eternity, you know what I 
mean? So we told the civilians, look, just head 
towards the water. Leave. Get out of the store. Go 
towards the water and keep walking. Just keep 
walking. Don't go this way. 

The three of us proceed - and I don't even 
know what street it is. I think it was Fulton. It 
might have been Dey Street. I don't even know what 
street it was. We start heading back. I believe the 
store was probably on Broadway. I think I made it that 
far up. I'm not even sure, though. It had to be 
because it couldn't have been on Church. 

Q. It wasn't J & R was it? 



20 
M. DELGADO 



A. No. I know where J & R is over by City 
Hall. No, I wasn't that far. It had to be around 
Broadway. So I remember we go outside and I lose track 
of where they went and I start heading down I guess 
it's Fulton Street and I heard the rumble again. So 
now it's the second tower coming down. 

Q. Now, just prior to that, had the air cleared 
outside? 

A. Yes. It had cleared to the point where you 
could see. It was still smoky. There was still a 
heavy smoke condition in the area and dust, I mean, and 
papers and debris and God knows what else was in the 
air. But it looks even like snow sometimes because 
that's kind of coming down from everywhere. 

Q. Were there any people out on the street at 
that point? 

A. There were people walking around, yes, in a 
daze. It looked like a moon landscape really. The 
lights were on, cars were driving by, and then more 
dust would be kicked up. I remember walking down and 
then I heard the second rumble, and I don't even know 
where it was now. I'm not even sure if I went back to 
Church or what. But we heard the second rumble, turned 
right around and started running again and went - and 



21 
M. DELGADO 



I remember just going - I don't even know what 
street. Now that I look at this map, I don't know what 
street I was at to be honest with you. I don't know if 
I got back to Broadway or - I know I ran backwards, 
not backwards, but I turned around and started running 
back up again and went into there was this liquor 
store - not a liquor store. It was a clothing store 
and there were some people in there already, and I got 
in there, and there was also, I believe, another Fire 
Marshal in that store. I don't who he was. I think he 
was a Fire Marshal. I'm not sure because he wasn't a 
cop. We were able to use the phone in there to try to 
call out, but whoever I was calling, I was trying to 
call some of my people but their cell phones weren't 
working. That was it. 

Then, at that point, five, fifteen minutes 
went by, I guess, before the smoke cleared again. 
There were very few people in the street at this 
point. I ended up on I guess it must be Fulton over by 
Beekman Hospital. There's a little triangular square. 
It's not even a park. It's like a little square. I 
ended up there and I ended up running into 
Dr. Cherson. That's the first time I saw him since the 
incident went down. Then we ran into Bruce Medjuck, 



22 

M. DELGADO 



Lieutenant Medjuck, and Bruce had a radio, because 
Alan's radio was blown off of his pocket or whatever 
and I don't know where it went, and he told us that we 
were assembling down at the ferry. That was going to 
be the main place to try to get people treated there 
because we weren't going to get around to West Street 
or to Chambers Street where they were trying to set up 
another command post because both buildings at this 
point were down. 

So that's what we did. We walked - I don't 
know where we walked, but we walked downtown all the 
way to the ferry terminal, and at that point Chief 
Basile was there with his aide and some other people 
were there and we started to get ready for mass 
casualties to see how many people were coming and who 
we could try to help. But there were no patients. 
Nobody was coming. 

Q. Not a single patient came to the ferry 
terminal? 

A. A few scratches, bumps, bruises, people who 
had already left the building way before, some people 
with some difficulty breathing, one guy with a broken 
ankle, another one with some trauma to the chest, but 
nothing life threatening, that was the big thing. 



23 
M. DELGADO 



Nothing gory. I mean, they were walking wounded for 
the most part, and that's all we treated. 

So a bunch of physicians came from 
surrounding hospitals, nurses. We got all our 
resources together, established a critical and a 
noncritical area, and that was it. 

Q. How long was that area set up? 

A. Well, from the time we got there, they had 
already started to move the benches to cordon off the 
area, and I guess within 20 to 30 minutes the site was 
set up to accept critical and noncritical. Then our 
resources started coming in more rapidly, so we were 
able to get a lot more stuff like extra equipment, 
blankets, cots. So we had about 20 or 30 critical 
areas to treat and Dr. Cherson at that point was the 
Chief medical officer there and started assigning 
physicians and nurses who were there and medics to 
certain areas. Then at the street level we had a 
staging area where the ambulances were being mustered 
and somebody was taking care of that area. I don't 
know who he was, some Lieutenant. But nothing ever 
came. 

Q. How long did you stay there? 

A. We stayed there until about, I guess, 4:00 



24 
M. DELGADO 



o'clock, and later on I found out this happened about 
10:00, I guess, when this thing collapsed. It must 
have been about 10:00. 

Q. Roughly, yes. 

A. So it must have been about 4:00 o'clock. 
What we did is we found out that they were setting up a 
command post on Chambers and West. So we said let's go 
back and try to find Dr. Cherson's car, see if it's 
still viable, which we did. We went back to Broadway 
where it was between Fulton and Dey. Is that Dey 
Street or whatever it is? There it was in the middle 
of the street. Amongst all the dirt and everything 
else that was there, the car was there. It was full of 
dust on the inside. We ended up driving to Battalion 8 
first to wash it off and try to clean off some of the 
dirt and dust that was all caked onto the vehicle, and 
then we went to Chambers and West, where the command 
post was set up, stood there for a little while, and 
then building 7 collapsed. 

We were very far and at this point I remember 
being there and they said it's collapsing and I didn't 
even give a shit anymore because, first of all, I was 
far enough away from it that I kind of knew it's not 
going to freaking hurt me and, really, I don't know if 



25 
M. DELGADO 



I was just in a mood that I just didn't give a shit or 
I felt kind of safe. People started running back and I 
was just... 

At this point my leg started to hurt me, 
which is interesting. All through the day it didn't 
hurt me. But I started feeling a tinge in my ankle. 

So building 7 came down, the OEM building, 
and then they moved back forward and the command post 
was set up and we started hearing of the casualties. 
That was sad. That was sad because a lot of my friends 
are dead. A lot of them. On both sides. And that's a 
shame. That's a shame. But basically that was it. 

I'd say about 9:30 at night, I hitched a ride 
with some vehicle that was coming to Brooklyn and they 
dropped me off on Tillary and Flatbush and I hobbled in 
here. They gave me clothes and stuff and told me to 
take a shower and that was it. I came back to work the 
next day, still not understanding, still not really - 
which was interesting because, when I got home that 
night, I got to see the incident. I lived it, but I 
had never seen it, because I had never seen the planes 
hit or anything. We thought they were bombs going 
off. We didn't know. We were being told later on that 
the Sears Tower was hit and the Pentagon, and you hear 



26 
M. DELGADO 



all this shit, but you don't know. Actually, when I 
got home that night, that's when I got to see the 
actual footage of the plane hitting. It was 
horrendous. More so when this thing collapsed. That 
noise? I can never forget it. And the people jumping, 
the people hitting. I mean, 18 years I've been a medic 
in this city. I've been through two plane crashes. I 
have never seen the destruction. 

Another thing I've got to tell you is, when 
we first got there, when we were walking down Vesey 
towards West, there was a ton of - or I could say a 
lot of body parts and like baggage, clothes and stuff, 
along Vesey. 

Q. From one of the airplanes. 

A. Yes, from one of the airplanes. I don't know 
if it was the first or the second because this was 
after the second one had hit. So it could have been 
from either one. But I remember walking - 

Q. Where was it, though? On Vesey? 

A. Right in front of the OEM, because on the OEM 
building side there was a scaffolding and I remember I 
was walking underneath there. We kind of felt that 
there was some protection underneath the scaffolding. 
I remember as we were walking down, after we had 



27 
M. DELGADO 



dropped that person off, when we were walking down 
Vesey, I remember probably between - what's this? 

Q. Church? 

A. No. Probably between Broadway and West, I 
remember seeing body parts. 

Q. That's West Broadway. 

A. Yes, West Broadway and West on Vesey. I 
remember seeing body parts and I remember saying to 
myself where the hell did these freaking body parts 
come from? Where are these coming from? There was a 
few. I mean, some recognizable, some that didn't look 
- like they were probably charred, and also like 
luggage stuff, like we saw a lot of shoes, even some 
luggage, airplane parts, engine. There was an engine 
on the left here. If you remember, building 7, there 
used to be that overpass over by building 7. Just in 
front of it. 

Q. The concourse. 

A. Just up before that, there was like a little 
plaza? 

Q. Right. 

A. Right there, there was like a big engine 
part. It seemed like a whole engine was right there, 
lying right there in the middle of the street. 



28 
M. DELGADO 



Q. Covered like the way the jet looks? 

A. Yes. In fact, you could see the fan. I 
remember that because I could see - now, it wasn't the 
whole engine because the engine is big, but I know the 
front part of it, it looked like the whole engine 
because I could see the fan, and that's what stood out 
in my mind. There was an airplane tire also there and 
then these bodies and luggage from the thing because 
there were shoes everywhere also. Some shoes had what 
looked like blood in it, other shoes didn't, other 
shoes were burnt, and this was just a first 
impression. 

I guess the severity of this whole incident 
kind of struck me as I was walking to West Street. I 
knew that this was a serious, very serious event going 
on, because in my lifetime I have never seen that much 
destruction, that much carnage. Never. Never in my 
life have I seen something like that. Everything from 
bombings that I've been to, to airplane crashes at 
LaGuardia, I've never seen something to this magnitude, 
and it kind of woke you up to say the least. 

Then over here people, you know, the guys 
were going into the building. I mean, it was 
horrible. It really was. It really was. And that was 



29 
M. DELGADO 



it. I'm here today because I think the grace of God. 
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^H I had 
a few patients who I wish I could have carried away, 
but you didn't have time. You didn't have time to 
think. I don't know where Lillo went. I don't know if 
he went this way or he went that way. Where did he 
go? I don't know. It's interesting because, of the 
seven or eight people who were there at this location, 
none of us ended up in the same place. It's sort of 
like roaches and you turn the light on, you know what I 
mean? Everyone scattered. Wherever you saw or you 
thought there was an opening, that's where you went. 
Obviously, no one went towards the building, but we all 
scattered in different directions. 

We eventually ended up meeting after the 
second explosion, three of us met up here, but I didn't 
see a lot of the people that were with me until two, 
three days later. I got word that they were okay. For 
instance, Dr. Guttenberg and Dr. Asaeda, who were at 7 
World Trade Center, they got trapped in there and had 
to like climb in and out and get out because that 
building also became very damaged supposedly and they 
were there. We thought they were dead. I guess he was 
in an area where Commissioner Tierney might have been, 



30 
M. DELGADO 



I believe. I think she was in 7 also. 

So it's just the grace of God. I mean, there 
was a tremendous loss, but I think that more people 
survived than really should have to be honest with you 
with the destruction that occurred there. I mean, you 
guys have been to collapses. You know what I'm talking 
about. You have a three-story building collapse, you 
know the destruction that occurs there. Magnitude that 
now by a hundred freaking stories coming down on your 
head. 

Q. And by two. 

A. Yes. And two of them. So it was the grace 
of God that any of us that are alive are here, truly it 
is, because it just should not have been. Luckily and 
unluckily, I guess, the building pancaked. But if that 
building toppled, there ain't no way. It took less 
than ten seconds for that blast of air to knock me down 
because I remember saying to myself, I gotten seconds 
to hide, thinking that I may have that long. I don't 
know why it came into my mind, ten seconds, but I 
figured I got ten seconds, and I could only maybe have 
run 50, 60 yards in that time period, and it just 
knocked me over. 

Q. Just the force of the air? 



31 
M. DELGADO 



A. Yes. It just knocked me over and just threw 
me, and that was it. I thought that something had hit 
me. I thought like a piece of metal or something had 
hit me, and there was no metal, because when I turned 
around, I saw the blast of black air coming at us, at 
me anyway, and that was it. That's it. That's the 
story. 

MR. McALISTER: Do you guys have any 
follow-ups? 

FIRE MARSHAL CAMPBELL: No. 

FIRE MARSHAL STARACE: No follow-up for me 
either. 

MR. McALISTER: I appreciate your time. 

THE WITNESS: Sure. 

MR. McALISTER: Thank you very much. 

THE WITNESS: No problem. Thank you. 

MR. McALISTER: It's now 2:35 p.m. and we're 
going to conclude the interview. 



File No. 9110006 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
PARAMEDIC JAMES MURPHY 
Interview Date: October 3, 2001 



Transcribed by Elizabeth F. Santamaria 



2 
J. Murphy 
KEVIN MC ALLISTER: This is Kevin 

McAllister from the Bureau of Administration. 

It's October 3, 2001 , 1224 hours. We are in 

room 8E13 at headquarters and we are speaking 

with Paramedic James Murphy from the office 

of medical affairs. I am joined by - 
MR. DANIEL: Patrick Daniel, Fire 

Marshal. 

MR. STARACE: Michael Starace, Fire 

Marshal. 

KEVIN MC ALLISTER: And James Murphy is 

with us. 

MR. MURPHY: James Murphy, Paramedic. 
BY MR. MC ALLISTER: 

Q. Mr. Murphy, we are going to draw your 
attention to September 1 1 , 2001 , and I would like to 
get your recollections of the event of that day. 

A. I was here in the office and someone came 
down the hall. I think they got one of the group 
pages that there was a job at the World Trade Center 
and we looked in the computer in the CAD system and 
saw that there was one, an aircraft incident at the 
World Trade Center, and then we heard yelling from 
the office of public information, so we all ran down 



3 
J. Murphy 
there. Because we knew the televisions were there. 

And we saw that something had happened to the World 

Trade Center. A couple of people from the office, 

two of the doctors and one of the medics, took off 

right away and the rest of us sort of stayed around 

getting ready to do whatever. And we ended up 

preparing to go get an ambulance. 

We left here, went to Cumberland, got equipment 
that belonged to one of the guys that worked here 
who couldn't go out and then went to Woodhull 
Hospital and got a ambulance and responded from 
Woodhull Hospital with the ambulance. 

When we went across the bridge, it was the last 
time we saw the towers. We went across the 
Manhattan Bridge and they were both still standing. 
We went across, I think, Canal Street. 

Q. Were both of the towers burning at that 
time? 

A. Both towers were burning at that time. We 
didn't leave until after the second plane hit. By 
the time we got through traffic to Woodhull to get 
the ambulance, I'm not - the timing on that I'm not 
sure. The only timing I really know is that we 
arrived between the time the first tower fell and 



4 
J. Murphy 
the time the second tower fell somewhere on 

Broadway, around City Hall and I don't remember 

whether it was at the junction of Park Row and 

Broadway or higher. I know Warren Street is there 

somewhere. Whether that was the first place we 

stopped or whether that was where we actually ended 

up stopping, I don't know. 

We went across Canal Street and then I went and 
turned and went down Broadway. We were heading into 
the staging area, which I believe was like on Church 
Street, somewhere around there, and - 

Q. Do you have any idea what time it was at 
that point? 

A. No. We had the radios on in the 
ambulance, but we didn't hear anything about the 
buildings collapsing because the siren was on. The 
truck was not the newest or the quietest thing in 
the fleet, so we couldn't really hear the radios 
that well. 

We turned down Broadway and as we got 
down in the City Hall area, there were people 
running everywhere and a lot of smoke and dust. We 
really weren't sure what it was. Which sort of 
surprised us, because the last thing we saw was the 



J. Murphy 
smoke was really up high. 

We saw, then, an EMS Captain, Janis 

Olszewski, standing in the middle of the street 

covered with dust waving at us. That's where I'm 

not sure where we stopped with her. 

Q. Somewhere on Broadway? 

A. Somewhere on Broadway, around City Hall. 
And whether it was up by Warren Street or farther 
down, I'm not really sure. I just know that Warren 
street was involved in our stopping at one point. 

We started treating some people at that point 
as they were running by. It was mostly like eye 
injuries from the flying debris. People were 
covered and they were having trouble breathing. 
Then We did hear a report that the second tower was 
starting to collapse and the Captain who was with us 
said, "Let's get out of here." Because she had 
heard the rumble then. It had reached us and we 
turned and started running and then I realized that 
I could drive a lot faster than I could run, so we 
grabbed the truck and I grabbed everybody else that 
I was with. 

That's when I'm not sure where the stop came. 
Whether I stopped first at Warren and then we went 



6 
J. Murphy 
on, but the Captain just kept going, kept going. I 

know we didn't stop running until Canal Street. 

Q. What did you observe at that point while 
you were running and what was the state of the 
street, if you recall? 

A. More people running, lots of people. The 
dust cloudy saw sort of in the mirror, the second 
one, as it was coming down. But I was too busy 
trying to avoid hitting the people that were running 
in the street. 

When we finally stopped to start treating 
people, we decided - the Captain felt safe and we 
decided we would go as far as she was, because she 
was obviously under the first one when it came down. 
She was a little, you know, a little, I guess, 
stressed. I don't know a better way to put it. 
When she finally felt comfortable, we stopped and 
started setting up. 

We ran into two EMT's and I'm not sure whether 
it was before we left or after, who had been at the 
staging area and had to run from their ambulances 
that had patients in them. Which was not good for 
them. It wasn't good for us to hear it either. But 
they started helping us to treat people at the 



J. Murphy 
scene. Again, it was very minor stuff, because 

nobody got to us that was pretty badly hurt. 

Q. The other EMT's you ran into left 
ambulances with patients in the back near the 
collapse? 

A. Yes. I'm not sure where those ambulances 
were. They ended up going a different way than us 
afterwards. Oh, because we had the Captain. They 
told her to report to the command post, so those 
EMT's stayed with ambulances that were staging 
somewhere else and we responded to the command post 
with that Captain. 



Q. Which Chief? 

A. Mittleman 

|and then 

went back to the command post and ended up at 
Chelsea staging. 

Q. Where was the command post that you are 
referring to? 

A. It was - I don't even remember where we 
went. It was on West Street somewhere. It was on 
West Street somewhere. 



8 
J. Murphy 
Q. Was it north of Chambers? 

A. Yes. At that point we didn't get anywhere 
back down there until - I didn't get back down that 
way until the next day. We stayed up at the 
Chelsea - the Chelsea Piers, and the three of us 
got assigned to do various things there: Assist the 
doctor who was there in setting up the hospital, in 
arranging which doctors and nurses were going to 
work in which areas. Because they set up a whole 
hospital in the Chelsea Piers and we had various 
tasks of organizing the medical assistance and stuff 
like that. 

That was it until I went back the next day with 
the doctor. We actually started walking around the 
site and looking at what was going on. Telling 
people that they should put their masks on and that 
kind of stuff. That filled up the whole next week 
pretty much. 

Q. Any other recollections about the date of 
the incident? Anything you might have seen that you 
recall? Any people you might have run into that you 
recall? 

A. I know by the end of the first night - 
well, by 10:00 o'clock the first night we had heard 



9 
J. Murphy 
that all of the people from our office were safe, 

but that some of them, like the doctors, had lost 

things like their glasses. Dr. Cherson was working 

at the ferry terminal without his glasses and he 

can't see. He's like me. I have contacts on. He 

had lost his glasses so we don't know how he was 

working, but he was. But everybody from our office 

was okay and then we had heard that there were 

hundreds of firefighters trapped and it was just - 

everybody was - you know, and then you started 

seeing people from the outer areas. We wondered how 

they got there so fast. You know, some of these 

guys were covered in dust and going back in again. 

The first hour went so fast for us. It didn't 
seem, because we had to get from here to the place 
and then back again. We didn't realize that it had 
taken so long. It was just like moments, it felt, 
from the time we left here to the time we were 
running from the second building coming down. We 
didn't even know the first one came down. We had no 
idea when we pulled up that that's what that was. 

Q. So it was still burning when you were in 
Brooklyn? 

A. When we came over the Manhattan Bridge, 



10 
J. Murphy 
you could clearly see both towers standing there 

burning. 

Q. Anything else? Radio transmissions that 
you recall? 

A. No. We took - we had radios from here 
with pretty bad batteries. That was on our 
portables. But the truck radio, we got a truck 
from - the actual vehicle radio wasn't very loud 
and the truck was really loud, and the siren, so I 
didn't hear. I'm sure there was a transmission 
about the first building coming down, but we never 
heard it. And there were three of us in the truck 
listening to the radio and none of us ever heard it. 
The first we knew was when Captain Olszewski told us 
that one of the towers had fallen. That was the 
first we heard. 

Then just before the second tower came down we 
heard a radio transmission about the second tower is 
falling. And then the Captain heard the rumbling. 
We all heard it, but she recognized it for what it 
was and told us, "Let's get the hell out of here." 
Because she heard the first one coming down. We 
never heard that one come down. 

Q. Was it a distant rumble or was it really 



11 

J. Murphy 
loud? 

A. It started off distant and got loud and 
then as we started running the sound sort of 
disappeared in the background with all the other 
stuff that I was doing and the sound of the 
ambulance Engine as I started driving. 

Q. Did the cloud of debris ever catch up with 
you or were you far enough? 

A. No. Never caught us. That's why I'm 
thinking that maybe we never got any farther than 
Warren Street. Tracey and Dee - we don't know - 
we were talking about it and we couldn't figure out 
whether we stopped farther down or whether we 
stopped at Warren Street. We are just not sure 
whether we got any farther down. 

The one thing I do remember is after we stopped 
running, people were actually - one guy passed us. 
Everybody was offering us food, drink. We were 
sitting treating people and some guy ran past us 
with three knapsacks. One on his back, one on his 
chest and one on his hand and he stopped and handed 
everybody a bottle of water in the ambulance and 
continued on. We could see the dust cloud and he 
just ran in with bottles of water. 



12 
J. Murphy 
Q. A civilian or - 

A. A civilian. Other people who were walking 
away said, he said, "I brought my lunch for work but 
obviously I'm not going to be working today. Would 
you like it?" People were offering us stuff all 
over the place. 

A city sheriff came over to us and said, "Do 
you guys need water to treat people?" We said yes, 
because we only had the little bottled water in the 
truck and we knew that wasn't going to last very 
long. The next thing we know, there is a city 
sheriff and two other guys with 5-gallon jugs, 
probably from - it said "Poland Spring" on it so it 
must have been a Poland Spring truck. I guess the 
guy just opened the doors and started giving it out 
to people. We had huge bottles of water in the 
truck to rinse people off. 

Then people wanted to rinse their mouth out. 
You can't keep having them all put their mouth on 
the same thing. Then I went to a little - a little 
tiny, hole-in-the-wall deli and asked the guy for a 
couple of cups and the guy comes out and gives me a 
whole case of cups. It's gotta cut huge into his 
profit margin, but he didn't care. He just gave me 



13 
J. Murphy 
a whole bunch. So then we started giving sleeves of 

cups to the ambulances that were sitting there. 

Then we moved on. That's actually before we moved 

to the command post. 

Captain Olszewski had to actually go into a 
store and use a phone, because all of our cell 
phones were dead. I guess there was just so much 
going on on the radio that she decided not to use 
the radio, just to call somebody. I'm not sure who 
she called, but then she said, "You gotta take me to 
the command post." 

Q. Any other recollections? 

A. No. 

KEVIN MC ALLISTER: Thank you very much. 

Interview concluded at 1237 hours on 

October 3, 2001 . 



-oOo- 



File No. 9110007 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMT DULCE McCORVEY 
Interview Date: October 3, 2001 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



D. McCORVEY 2 

MR. MCALLISTER: This is Lieutenant 
McAllister from the Bureau of 
Administration. It's 1252 hours on October 
3rd, 2001. We're in Room 8E13 at Fire 
Department headquarters, and we're about to 
interview EMT Dulce McCorvey. I am joined 
by- 

MR. CAMPBELL: Patrick Campbell, fire 
marshal. 

MR. STERACE: Michael Sterace, fire 
marshal. 

MR. MCALLISTER: And. 
EMT McCORVEY: Dulce McCorvey. 
Q. I would just like to draw your 
attention to September 1 1th, 2001 . Give your 
recollections from the events of that day. 

A. The times are a little blurry. I don't 
remember - I know we had gone downstairs. It 
was like around 8:00, and I went downstairs with 
someone to get coffee. As we were coming up, 
everyone was running out of the buildings, the 
elevators. I almost got run over by a lot of 
white shirts and a lot of gold. 

We came upstairs. Everyone was 



D. McCORVEY 3 

running. We walked by OPI. We saw on the TV 
screen that a plane had already hit the building, 
the first building. I pulled the job up on the 
CAD screen, and that's what it said, it was a 
cargo plane (inaudible). 

So at that time I went over to my 
supervisor. One of the docs and one of the 
paramedics was going out already. She told us to 
hang back and wait and see what happened. I 
don't know exactly what she said. 

By the time the second plane hit, I had 
already gone downstairs, gotten my equipment out 
of my car that was parked outside on Flatbush 
Avenue. You could see the smoke coming from the 
buildings, because you could see the buildings 
from the back of this building. I could see the 
smoke coming back - in the back of the building. 

I came upstairs. She said, "We've got 
to go find an ambulance." There was myself, Jim 
Murphy and Tracey Mulqueen. We tried calling the 
different stations. Cumberland down the block, 
they said to come down and get an ambulance. 

We got in my car, all the equipment and 
the three of us, and drove to Cumberland. They 



D. McCORVEY 4 

couldn't give us an ambulance. The captain said 
they didn't have any available at the moment. We 
went down to Woodhull. We went through a lot of 
traffic. We finally got an ambulance. It wasn't 
stocked or anything. So that delayed us a bit. 
We got in the ambulance, and we drove 
down to the Brooklyn Bridge or the Manhattan 
Bridge. I don't remember which bridge we took. 

Q. Did you have a radio with you? 

A. We had a radio. We had a portable 
radio. The battery died, so we couldn't get any 
communications out. The KDT in the ambulance was 
broken, so we couldn't log on. So we were 
getting - I don't remember hearing what they 
were saying, because I was sitting in the back of 
the ambulance, and Tracey and Jimmy were sitting 
in the front. I couldn't really hear what they 
were saying. 

We were listening to citywide, and 
there was a lot of communication. I couldn't 
tell what it was. We had the siren on, and there 
was a lot of confusion trying to get around 
traffic, people trying to get on the bridge, 
people blocking us. 



D. McCORVEY 5 

It was the Manhattan Bridge. We got 
off the Manhattan Bridge, because I remember 
getting off at Canal. 

Q. There was a lot of non-emergency 
traffic on the bridge? 

A. Yeah. Well, no, they were blocking off 
the bridge. 

Q. Oh, I see. 

A. They were diverting them, so it was 
hard getting onto the bridge. When we finally 
did get on the bridge, the bridge was here. So 
it was the Manhattan Bridge. 

I don't know what road we went down, 
because I couldn't see too clearly. We ended up 
on Broadway. We were speeding down Broadway 
following - there were traffic cops directing 
everybody go down that way. So we followed them. 

We were going down Broadway. I don't 
know exactly at what point we stopped on 
Broadway. We saw a captain that I knew her from 
the academy, and she was full of dust. We didn't 
know where we were going. We were looking for 
the incident command center. We really didn't 
know. We were just going towards the building. 



D. McCORVEY 6 

When we saw her, we pulled over to help 
her. She was saying an explosion - she didn't 
say the building went down; she said she was 
under the building when the plane went down. 
That's what I remember. We tried to calm her 
down, because she was upset. 

Then we heard this loud noise like 
another plane. That's what we thought it was, 
another plane. It was a real loud rumbling. I 
can hear a lot of people screaming. We didn't 
know what it was, and we turned around and saw 
people running the opposite way on Broadway, 
running north on Broadway. We could see this 
big, black cloud of smoke coming up. I said, 
"Oh, shit." 

We turned around, and Janice says, 
"Run!" So we ran. We started running. We 
turned around and ran. Janice ran, and Tracey 
was running, and Jimmy was right behind us. I 
didn't see where Jimmy was. I stopped and 
screamed, "Jimmy!" I didn't see him. He had 
gone back and gotten the ambulance and turned 
around. 

He pulled us into the ambulance. We 



D. McCORVEY 7 

ran into the ambulance. All I could see is 
behind, because I was in the back of the bus. 
All I could see is this big cloud of smoke coming 
and people just coming out from inside this cloud 
of smoke. You could see from the side streets, 
like you could see smoke coming down the side 
streets, swelling up the road. 

So we just kept on going. At one point 
we slowed down and we stopped in front of 26 
Federal Plaza. I said, "We can't stop here. 
We've got to keep on going." So we kept on 
going, and we went up close to Canal Street. I 
don't know what street we stopped on. We stopped 
there. 

Q. During that time when you were on 
Broadway and heading north on Broadway, did you 
notice any fire apparatus? 

A. I saw no fire apparatus. I saw no 
firemen at all. 

Q. Any other EMS vehicles? 

A. I saw two other EMS vehicles. Where we 
had finally stopped, there were two other EMS 
vehicles. Two guys came out. They were running. 
They came out without the ambulance. They work 



D. McCORVEY 8 

in Manhattan, I'm pretty sure. They said they 
weren't in shock. One of them was crying. I 
can't remember his last name. 

He said there were two patients in the 
back of his bus. They were strapped to a long 
board. He had to run, and the building fell on 
the ambulance. So I don't remember (inaudible). 
I know the guy - I can't remember his name. 
They were pretty upset. 

Everybody coming out was cops. There 
were a lot of cops coming out, all full of that 
white dust. There were a lot of people 
screaming, crying, hurt, a lot of cuts and 
bruises. 

We stayed there for a while. I don't 
know how long. 

Q. That's near Canal Street on Broadway? 
A. Yeah, because I could see Canal up the 
block, and we were on Broadway. 

I don't know the times, really. Now 
it's like a blur, like a million years ago. 

We treated people as they needed to be 
treated, and we tried to help where we could. 
Somebody brought us water, a big jug of water. 



D. McCORVEY 9 

Just a lot of cops were coming up. I don't know 
what precinct they were from. 

From then Janice said she's got to find 
a command center, so we started going toward the 
west side and went towards West Street. 

Q. Janice is the captain? 

A. Yeah. 

Q. Olszewski; right? 

A. Olszewski, right. 

So we went up to West Street. On West 
Street there was a lot of commotion. There was a 
lot of units. I saw firemen walking, a lot of 
firemen walking. They were walking up, all 
covered in soot. There were trucks going down. 
I couldn't tell you what the companies were. 

I saw an EMS captain and an EMS chief. 
We went up to them, and we saw one of our medical 
directors. I saw units from Bellevue. 

Q. Do you know any of their names? 

A. The medic unit was Artie Gonzalez and 
Al Siegel. They're a medic unit from Bellevue. 
I saw Dr. Richmond. I saw him. I saw Chief 
Mittleman and Captain - I can't think of his 
name. 



D. McCORVEY 10 

Q. Where did you see them? 

A. West Street at West Street. 

Q. West Street and - 

A. West Street and - I have no idea. 
West Street. It was below Chelsea Piers, way 
below Chelsea Piers. 

Q. Was it south of Canal, do you think? 

A. It was south of Canal. 

Q. On West south of Canal? 

A. Yeah. But I don't know names. 

Q. How close to the site? 

A. All I could see is a lot of smoke, so I 
really don't know how close I was to the site. 
Maybe Barclay Street? Maybe that far down, 
Barclay Street? 

Q. Did they tell you they were coming from 
the site? 

A. No, they didn't say that. We just went 
up to the chief and told them that Janice was 
under the building when the plane hit | 

Then he said, "Well," to the captain, 



D. McCORVEY 



11 




|We couldn't get out of the city, so we 
ended up at NYU| 





Q. ^^^^^^V 

A. Yeah. 

| We saw a couple 
cops in the hospital. Actually we saw a lot of 
cops with injuries in the hospital, minor, not 
serious. 

We went to Bellevue to gas up, and as 
we're gassing up we hear that loud rumble again. 
The three of us knew already to hide under the 
ambulance or go into the garage, because we 
didn't know what it was. We thought another 
building was going to come down or another jet 
was coming. But the fighter jets were flying 
over Manhattan. We're like, are they ours? 



D. McCORVEY 12 

After that we went back. We had seen 
Dr. Richmond, and Dr. Richmond said, "Come back 
here." We ended up here. We went back to 
Chelsea Piers, and we ended up in Chelsea Piers. 
We were trying to find Dr. Richmond. We didn't 
see him right away, but we saw a lot of 
ambulances. 

The people I saw I know from Manhattan. 
Most of the people I know were Manhattan 
ambulances. I didn't see any fire trucks. 
Police cars, I just saw police cars blocking the 
entrance going down that way towards the Piers. 

While we were at the pier, they were 
setting up the hospital. We were in there for a 
while. Then we finally caught up with 
Dr. Richmond. He said to help out with the 
volunteers. There were a lot of volunteers 
coming up that wanted to help. 

So we set up with the medical 
volunteers and tried to set them up and tried to 
get their names down and see if they could come, 
they could stay. We didn't know what the 
situation was. 

Around I think it was maybe 4 or 5:00, 



D. McCORVEY 13 

one of the cops said that the buildings were 
collapsing still and there were people still in 
need. They were pulling out anybody from the 
area. So we just told the docs to hang out, the 
volunteers to hang out and wait and see what 
happens. 

We just helped set up blood donations. 
People wanted to come and donate blood. People 
wanted to come and help and do anything they 
could. So we just helped set that up a little 
bit. 

Q. Did you treat anybody? 

A. Not there, not at the Chelsea Piers we 
didn't treat anybody. Later at night, maybe 
1 1 :00, we had like a bus load of cops that came 
in from ground zero. They were treated in the 
hospital. Maybe about 10, 15. Then after that 
we started getting a couple bus loads. We saw 
some firefighters come in. I don't know where 
they were from. It seemed like everybody was 
from all over the place. 

I stayed there until about 1 :00 and 
then hitched a ride with an ambulance. I was 
going back to the academy, and then I went home. 



D. McCORVEY 14 

That's pretty much it. I really didn't 
see any firemen. I saw fire trucks. I remember 
seeing fire trucks coming down that way from West 
Street to Chelsea Piers. 

Q. Any other recollections, things that 
you may have observed that were odd or unusual or 
just things that you recall that you can tell us 
about? 

A. Unusual in what sense? The whole day 
was unusual. I don't know. 

The things that stick out in my mind is 
the fire in the towers when we were going down. 
In my car we were going down towards the station, 
and we could see the fire in the towers. The 
cloud of smoke coming towards us. 

Just standing at Chelsea Piers and not 
seeing the towers. A lot of police, a lot of 
Secret Service, a lot of ambulances. People from 
every voluntary hospital that you could think of 
was down there, from all over. Fire trucks from 
volunteer fire departments were down there, ones 
that I know, from all over, as well as from God 
knows where, towns I never heard of before. A 
lot of people coming down. If you needed water, 



D. McCORVEY 15 

you asked for water, they gave you water. You 
ask for a bottle of water, and you got a jug of 
water. 

MR. MCALLISTER: I'm going to conclude 
the interview. It is now 1306 hours, and we 
are going to conclude the interview. Thank 
you. 



File No. 9110009 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
LIEUTENANT MURRAY MURAD 
Interview Date: October 4, 2001 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



M. MURAD 2 

MR. CAMPBELL: Today is October 4th at 
10:30 in the morning. We're in conference 
room 4E21 at headquarters. My name is 
Patrick Campbell, Fire Marshal, here to 
conduct an interview with Murray Murad about 
the occurrence of September 11th. 

Also present in the room is -- 
MR. STARACE: Michael Starace, Fire 
Marshal . 

LIEUTENANT MURAD: Murray Murad, 
Lieutenant Investigator with Bureau of 
Investigations and Trials. 

Q. Okay, Murray, we're just coming here 
and trying to do a fact-finding mission of what 
you saw on September 11th in the morning of the 
plane crash and the incident that happened at the 
World Trade Center. Just tell us what you saw 
and did that day. 

A. Well, I was conducting business down on 
Greenwich and Liberty at Engine 10, Truck 10, on 
that day. I happened to walk through the 
quarters around 8:35 and I asked to speak to the 
officer in charge of the truck -- I think that 
was Captain Mallery; I think it's 



M. MURAD 3 

M-A-L-L-E-R-Y -- I needed to speak to one of the 
firemen. It so happens who I was looking for, 
the firefighter was there. 

So we went upstairs and we started to 
prepare the paperwork. I was conducting a 
confidential investigation at the fire house. It 
was about 8:41 that we heard a plane hovering 
over the fire house. It sounded like the plane 
was right on top of us. At that time the captain 
was upstairs. He was taking a shower in the 
office and I was conducting the work with the 
firefighter . 

The captain came out and said: "What's 
going on? This is a no-fly zone. There should 
be no planes over here unless this is a military 
plane, a plane in trouble." Other than that, 
there was really no clue. 

So about two or three minutes after 
hearing it, you heard something like revving. We 
took a look, and, boom, the north tower is hit. 
So what happened was everyone left the house 
except for the captain, because he already had 
his relief. What I'm assuming is that he's going 
to man the house. His relief was there. 



M. MURAD 4 

They all took off. The engine and the 
truck took off I guess they both were responding 
to a pre-arranged staging location when the World 
Trade Center is involved in some kind of major 
incident. And they all took off. 

So what happened was people were 
running out of the building. We got a couple of 
injuries. We were treating them. 

Q. Out of the building, out of the Trade 
Center? 

A. Out of the Trade Center, yeah. I don't 
know which Trade Center building they came out 
of, but it was either the north or the south 
building . 

It was very minimal, like five, six 
patients . They came with very, very minor 
injuries. There was a police officer in the fire 
house. I asked him: Listen, can you get an 
ambulance here, we have a couple minor injuries. 
We need an ambulance at the staging location 
here . 

The ambulance comes in. The first EMT 
that walks in, he sprained his ankle. So he was 
not much of a help, but he tried to get these 



M. MURAD 5 

people as comfortable as possible. 

Let me go back. Let me go back one 
second before this. After the first plane hit, 
we went downstairs after everyone took off. I 
was there downstairs for maybe seven, eight 
minutes . 

I went back upstairs because I wanted 
to get something out of my bag. Maybe about 
10 to 12-minutes after that first plane, I heard 
another plane. Then I said to myself, we're 
being attacked. 

I ran downstairs . No sooner did I run 
downstairs and look up, that I saw the second 
plane strike the south tower. It was such a 
vicious hit and such a precision hit, it was 
unbelievable . 

Still we didn't have that many more 
people coming into the fire house, just regular 
civilians hanging around. They were looking at 
everything else like that. So pretty much 
everything was pretty much stabilized in the fire 
house. The captain was still the only one there. 

At that point there were two fire 
marshals that came to the house. They wanted to 



M. MURAD 6 

borrow some equipment. I can't identify who they 
were. I forget what they looked like. They got 
some gear from the house and then they took off. 
So I only saw them for a second. I only 
determined they were fire marshals because they 
had their jackets on. 

So at this point what I did was I went 
around the corner to Liberty and Greenwich to 
tell the people listen, just keep walking, just 
keep walking as far as you can, just stay away 
from the buildings . 

I got to the American Stock Exchange 
building. A guy came out and asked me what do 
you think we should do? I said listen, if it was 
me, I tell you in one word, R-U-N, run, just 
leave. Oh, we have a protocol, for this and 
that. Listen, you've to get your people to 
safety. I don't think being in the building is 
that safe. But this is the American Stock 
Exchange. I said listen, you do what you have to 
do. We have a couple of retired cops on the job 
here. So one of them called me over. I told him 
the same story. I said listen, you guys need to 
get out of here, just for safety reasons. Again, 



M. MURAD 7 

he told me that they have their protocol that 
they do. 

So I continued on my little excursion 
here trying to get people out of the stores, out 
of the buildings. I went to all of the shops 
right behind the fire house. I said listen, just 
leave your building, just leave. 

Q. This is on Greenwich Street? 

A. Yeah, right on Greenwich and Liberty, 
right behind the fire house, right on -- is it 
Cider or Cedar? 

Q. Cedar? 

A. Cedar. They have all the little coffee 
shops there, bagel stores, gourmet shops there 
with all the foods. I told them just leave, 
just -- don't even close your business, just walk 
out and leave. They're telling me they're okay, 
they're okay. Now it's getting a little 
frustrating because I said listen, you should 
really leave. Don't lock your door, but let your 
employees go. That didn't seem to work. 

So I went back into the fire house to 
see what I could do. The EMS unit was trying to 
treat a couple of people. We had a guy with a 



M. MURAD 8 

broken leg, possibly, and maybe one patient with 
second degree burns but nothing life-threatening. 
All the injuries in the fire house were minor. 
There were really no life-threatening injuries. 

So in a matter of 15, 20 minutes, the 
captain yelled out and you heard this roar. All 
he said was run to the back, it's coming down. 
And we all started running to the back of the 
fire house. 

I know the design of Engine 10, Truck 
10. It's on the corner, pretty wide. Then as 
you go into the house it narrows into the 
hallway. It has a phone. It has a TV room. 
Then it has a bathroom and a kitchen, which I 
totally forgot about, the kitchen during the 
collapse . 

Everyone's running down to the basement 
or upstairs. One of the firefighters, who must 
have come in when they were calling all these 
guys in, I don't know who they were, said go 
upstairs, go upstairs. A lot of people didn't 
want to go upstairs because they were afraid. 
The building is coming down upstairs. 

So as we were running, we were picking 



M. MURAD 9 

up the injured people. They would fall, we would 
stop, two people pick them up. 

Q. Still in the house? 

A. Still in the house. Then it came down. 
From the implosion, we all got thrown and all 
that stuff came in the house, all that debris, 
all that concrete and all that fiberglass. Name 
it, it was in there. It was incredible. Then it 
started getting dark, darker. You couldn't even 
see in front of you. 

Q. Inside? 

A. Inside the fire house. You couldn't 
even see. I couldn't even see in front of my 
face. Then it became very, very black. We were 
trying to get out the door. The back entrance 
was blocked with all the rubble. Somehow they 
were able to get the door open. Again I think 
most of us forgot about the kitchen. We were all 
trying to go out through the back. So everyone I 
think got out. 

So what happened was I got out and I 
went to see what was going on. It was a 
nightmare. Cars were tossed. I mean, all that 
stuff was in the air, on the street. 



M. MURAD 10 

So I walked up to Trinity Place. It 
just so happens I needed a mask, you know. I 
happened to see Matty James who was in a Jeep. I 
said Matty, you got a mask? He said: "I have a 
couple of Scott packs." I didn't want to take 
one because they had a couple of fire trucks that 
were hanging out right in front of him. I don't 
know what fire trucks they were, but they looked 
kind of beaten up from the explosion. 

Q. This was on where? 

A. On Trinity Place. 

Q. On Trinity? 

A. And Cedar. 

Q. Cedar. 

A. Right, right up there. 

Q. They were parked there, and they were 
smashed? 

A. I don't know if they were really 
smashed, but there was a lot of debris on them. 
I only saw one or two. I can't really identify 
them because there was so much debris in the air 
and on the ground. The pictures that you see, 
that's what was going on. 

So he said to me: "Hop in my car, I'll 



M. MURAD 11 

give you a ride, because there's a cop, he's 
giving out masks on the corner." Meanwhile I 
can't see, my eyes are so red and irritated and 
I'm coughing up all the soot and everything. So 
I got a mask from the cop. 

Then there was like a little cappuccino 
store right there. I knocked on the door and was 
let in. Listen, can I use your facilities here? 
He said oh, yeah, come on in, wash up. I just 
wanted to wash my face and get all that stuff out 
of my eyes. He said hey, have some water. He 
gave me a bottle of water. I was there about 15 
minutes. Then I started walking out. 

I walked about two, three minutes, and 
all of a sudden I heard a plane. Now, I'm like 
the only one walking on this block. I said oh, 
my God, we're being attacked again. Someone said 
it could have been a B15, a U.S. plane up in the 
air. Actually, what I think it was, was 
simultaneously the plane and the north tower 
coming down. So that's what the sounds were. I 
heard that rumble. 

So I started going back to the area 
where Liberty Street was . I went up to Liberty 



M. MURAD 12 

Street. Everything's destroyed, everything, all 
the buildings around it. The only thing standing 
was the fire house. 

I re-entered the fire house. I spotted 
a chief. I think it was Philip Burns only 
because someone called his name. A couple of 
firemen were in there. There was Firefighter 
Peter D'Ancona. He was there. He was assigned 
there. I saw him. He was looking for gear. 
There was no gear to be found for these guys, no 
turn-out coats, no nothing. Everything was gone. 

Guys were coming in. A couple of 
companies were coming in just trying to assist. 
It was still dark out. 

What happened was everybody got out of 
the house safely. I asked the captain where is 
everybody? He said everyone's out, everyone's 
fine, everyone's good. There was nothing else to 
do. Then I spotted the two EMTs that were 
assigned to the location. I said listen, I have 
a car -- 

Q. Do you remember their names? 
A. No, I don't. The ambulance was 
destroyed in the collapse. I don't know if it 



M. MURAD 13 

was totaled, but there was a lot of damage to the 
vehicle . 

Q. Where was that vehicle? 

A. It was parked right inside the 10 and 
10 house. 

Q. On the side? 

A. Right inside. 

Q. Oh, inside? 

A. Inside, right. They backed it up. I 
don't know if they were going to do triage or 
going to transport. 

Q. How did the ambulance get damaged? 

A. All the debris from the collapse of -- 

Q. So it was outside? 

A. It was inside. From the implosion, 
everything just came inside. 

Q. The doors were open? 

A. The doors were open. 

Q. Oh, the doors were open? 

A. Yeah. They should have been closed, 
but I don't think -- no one expected within an 
hour the collapse. It was an awful thing. 

Q. Where did you park? 

A. I parked down on Greenwich between -- I 



M. MURAD 14 

think it's Carlisle and Rector. That's where I 
was parked. 

Q. So you were down a little further? 

A. Yeah. Because what happened was when I 
got to the house it was almost changing shifts 
and I didn't want to take a parking spot up, 
because they double park there and everywhere 
right around the corner. It was still early. I 
said you know what, let me just park up further. 
I found a spot, I pulled the car in, and then I 
just walked up to the fire house. 

Q. You never made it to the towers? You 
never went near the towers? 

A. No, that was just from my location of 
being right at 10 and 10. That was the closest I 
was . 

Q. Philip Burns was in there during that 
whole time? 

A. I only saw him when I came back after 
the second tower collapsed. I'm only saying it 
was Philip Burns because someone said that was 
Chief Burns . 

Q. That was after the second? 

A. After the second collapse. 



M. MURAD 15 

Q. When the first one was hit, you were 
outside? 

A. No, I was almost in front of the house 
at the front doors. The doors were open. 

Q. Which is actually right across the 
street? 

A. Right across the street. It was on 
Liberty and Greenwich. 

Q. You looked up and you saw the -- 

A. I didn't look up. What happened was 
the captain just -- we heard a roar, and he just 
yelled out it's coming down, just run to the back 
of the fire house. 

Q. Oh, no, when it hit -- did you see 
it -- were you outside when it hit? 

A. No. 

Q. You were inside? 

A. Yeah. We just heard all the rumble and 
all -- the collapse. 

Q. I'm saying you were in the house when 
the first plane hit? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Did you go out at all right after it? 

A. When the first plane hit? I did. I 



M. MURAD 16 

went outside. 

Q. What did you see then? 

A. I just saw the fire -- the smoke coming 
out from the top from the north tower. 

Q. Was there any debris? 

A. Not at that time. 

Q. No debris at all? 

A. No. Stuff was coming down, but nothing 
real major. After the second plane hit even more 
stuff came down. 

Q. I'm sorry, when the second plane hit. 

A. When the second plane hit, it was just 
a lot of fire, a lot of black smoke. 

Q. Coming out? 

A. Right. What happened was that we 
looked up and then within a couple of minutes one 
guy jumped -- an individual came out. It wasn't 
like a jump, because they came out backwards. 
Evidently from the explosion up on those floors 
they got blown out. Someone else came down and 
they were coming out. I only saw two people come 
out . 

Now we had more people congregating in 
the fire house. We would just evaluate them, if 



M. MURAD 17 

they were injured. No, we're not injured. We 
need a phone. 

Of course the cell phones were not 
working. The only cell phone that worked I think 
was Nextel . It's a two-way portable radio, 
practically, and you can have contact. You don't 
even have to worry about dialing. That's the 
only phones that were working. 

Everyone's cell phones were just not 
working. My cell phone was dead. The beepers 
were dead. Everything in the fire house was 
dead. There was no communication whatsoever. So 
we just relied on whatever information we were 
able to get, which was actually really nothing. 

Q. Were there a lot of plane parts or 
anything when the second one hit? 

A. Not that I saw, no. 

Q. You said there were firemen around you. 
Did you hear any transmissions going on? 

A. No. It was all verbal among the 
firemen just discussing. The radio communication 
was fairly -- I didn't hear anything. 

MR. CAMPBELL: Do you have anything 

else, Mike? 



M. MURAD 18 

Q. Anybody else you actually recognized? 

A. I recognized the captain. I recognized 
one of the firefighters. I recognized a 
lieutenant that was from BHS . I don't know his 
last name. His first name is John. He was good 
friends with Geoff Guja. Actually they went down 
together. Geoff unfortunately didn't make it. 

Q. You don't remember the fireman's name? 

A. No, that was with him? I don't 
remember . 

Q. Captain Mallery, he stayed in the fire 
house the whole time? 

A. I believe so. 

Q. Anything else? Is there anything else 
you want to add? You can say anything about how 
you felt or whatever. 

A. It was something that if you were 
there, to describe it, it was horrible. It was a 
horrific act against us. It was something that 
you would never, ever think would ever, ever 
happen to this country. 

When those towers came down, it was 
like a sign of something. When all these 
people -- I mean, war is war. They talk about 



M. MURAD 19 

Pearl Harbor. Bottom line is Pearl Harbor was a 
military base, installation. It was peace time. 
But here what happened was we got two 
planes, our own planes, going into two towers and 
killing almost 5,000 people. It was just an 
awful day. It was day I'll never forget, just 
the sounds of everything and the planes hitting. 
The awful sound of hearing that plane over the 
fire house. It was like it was sitting right on 
top of the fire house. That's how close it was. 
And then revving up the engine and then hitting 
the north tower. 

Q. You had said earlier people in the fire 
house were alarmed when they heard the plane. 
They felt something was wrong? 

A. Oh, yeah. 

Q. Before it even -- 

A. I was upstairs. There was only the 
captain and the firefighter. It was George 
Bachmann who was up there with me. George 
Bachmann was in Vietnam -- served in Vietnam. So 
he knows certain sounds. Like we said, this is a 
no-fly zone here. What's a plane doing here? 

So as soon as that plane hit, they all 



M. MURAD 2 

took off. The only one left was the captain at 
the time. Anybody else coming back, coming into 
the house was either called in or off-duty guys 
coming in, grabbing equipment. I saw the two 
fire marshals. They were grabbing equipment. 
They asked the captain: "We need some gear." 

But again, no one ever expected it to 
collapse like that. Just thankfully a pancake 
rather than toppling over. That would have been 
a nightmare. But in an hour the intensity of 
that heat must have been incredible. 

Q. Did any of the guys from 10 and 10 come 
back after -- 

A. They were out. I understand that a lot 
of them didn't come back. 

Q. So none of them came back after, while 
you were around? 

A. No, no. They, I think, just went to 
the location where they were supposed to go and 
whatever assignment they were given. The problem 
was when the south tower went down, I guess there 
was no communication and people just went into 
the north tower. That's what they were saying. 
When the south tower came down, that 



M. MURAD 21 

was where the communication was. While 
the north tower is still up, burning, guys were 
just told go into the building. There was no 
radio communication. That's what -- 

Q. You were by the south tower? 

A. Right. 

Q. After that got hit, were there any 
firefighters going into Two World Trade from 
Liberty Street or anything? 

A. No, they just -- everyone just got in 
and they went to -- 

Q. No, I'm saying when the second one hit 
when they were responding when they made the 
other alarm for the second tower. 

A. Right. 

Q. Units were assigned to the second tower 
or the south tower. Did you see any of them go 
in? 

A. No, no. Actually I didn't see any 
units from where I was. They must have all gone 
to Vesey or they were parked on Church right up 
on the street. I saw some fire apparatus up on, 
I think it was, Church or Trinity or right up 
there on Liberty Street. 



M. MURAD 22 

Q. Did you see any numbers or anything? 
A. No. 

MR. CAMPBELL: All right. This 
concludes the interview. It's 10:52. Thank 
you very much. 



File No. 9110010 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
PARAMEDIC TRACEY MULQUEEN 
Interview Date: October 4, 2001 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



T. MULQUEEN 2 

MR. MCALLISTER: This is Kevin 
McAllister from the Bureau of 
Administration. It's October 4th, 2001. 
We're at Fire Department headquarters in 
8E13, and we're about to begin an interview 
with Tracey Mulqueen, who's a paramedic 
assigned to the office of medical affairs. 
I 'm joined by -- 

MR. CASTORINA: Ron Castorina, Bureau 
of Investigations and Trials. 

MR. TAMBASCO: Mike Tambasco, Bureau of 
Investigations and Trials. 

MR. MCALLISTER: Tracey Mulqueen as 
well . 

Q. We're just going to draw your attention 
to September the 11th and ask you for your 
recollections about the events of that day. 

A. I guess to start with, the first time I 
started hearing -- I was actually in the pantry 
making breakfast. I started to hear people 
screaming. The first thought was that there was 
a bird in reception, like a bird had flown in or 
something. I don't know where that came from. 
I went out to see what was going on, 



T. MULQUEEN 3 

and I went to the eighth floor reception and I 
could see the flames and the smoke coming out of 
the first tower in the Trade Center. It was 
surreal. It's like you're seeing it but you're 
not really processing it. 

I was watching for a few minutes, and 
the second plane came in. Basically the next 
thing I remember after that was we had all of our 
office's medical equipment on a chair and we were 
running out the building. 

They had somehow worked out for us to 
get an ambulance at one of the battalions in 
Brooklyn. So we ran to somebody's personal car, 
because we didn't even try to get a pool car. We 
figured all the pool cars were probably gone at 
that point, which I wouldn't be surprised if they 
were . 

So we're driving through Brooklyn, and 
three of us -- it was myself, James Murphy, who's 
another paramedic, and Dulce McCorvey, who is an 
EMT in the office. So we go into her personal 
car with all the equipment, and we're driving and 
we're hoping we don't get lost. 

Again, we're in a personal vehicle. 



T. MULQUEEN 4 

I'm basically stopping at the red lights. I'm 
jumping out of the car, stopping traffic so we 
can drive through, because we just needed to get 
there. I probably shouldn't be telling this to 
the BITS people, but anyway. 

Q. We've heard this story before. 

A. I know. 

Just trying to stop. People looked at 
us like what's going on. I guess people didn't 
know yet. We were listening to the radio, the 
regular AM radio -- I forget what station it 
was -- and starting to hear the reports about 
what's going on. 

So we get an ambulance, we throw our 
stuff in it, and we start heading over to 
Manhattan. We were driving and we come over -- I 
think we came over the Manhattan Bridge and went 
around City Hall. We were driving down Broadway, 
and there was no AM/FM radio in the ambulance, so 
we had no idea what was going on at this point. 

Q. What were you able to observe as you 
came over the bridge and after you entered 
Manhattan? 

A. Just there was a lot of cops. There 



T. MULQUEEN 5 

was a lot of activity. I really wasn't seeing 
people, like the hordes of people like you see on 
the news . I think we were more concerned about 
going the right way and not getting lost. I was 
in the passenger seat of the ambulance, so I was 
kind of copiloting at that point. 

We started to come down Broadway, and 
we could start to see people coming up at us, 
just all types of pedestrians, walking only in 
one direction. Like I said, we didn't have a 
radio in our ambulance, and nothing had come over 
the regular FD radio. So we didn't even know the 
first tower had collapsed at that point, and we 
were driving straight in. We had no clue. 

One of the captains from operations, 
Janice Olszewski, if she hadn't stopped us, we 
probably would have been right underneath the 
tower when it came down. We had no idea what was 
going on. 

We were coming down Broadway, and I'm 
not sure exactly where we ended up but I believe 
we were probably at Broadway and Vesey. We were 
probably right about here. She had flagged us 
down. We got out of the ambulance. We started 



T. MULQUEEN 6 

talking to her. You could see that she had that 
look in her eye. She told us that the tower had 
come down . 

Literally within like maybe a minute or 
two of being on the scene, you could start to 
hear the rumble again. Everybody just said, "Get 
out of here!" Everybody just took off running. 

Q. That was the rumble from the second 
tower? 

A. It was, definitely, because you could 
start to see the dust cloud was starting to come 
at us and everything. We were running up 
Broadway, and I don't know how he did this, 
because all I thought was just get the hell out 
of here. I had Captain Olszewski in my sight, 
and I had Dulce McCorvey in my sight, and we were 
together. I had no idea where Jimmy Murphy went. 
The next thing you know, the ambulance 
comes up Broadway. "Get in!" Cool. So we all 
jumped in, and we just all sat in the back. You 
could see the dust clouds coming at us and going 
down the side streets. 

Q. You were moving, you were driving? 

A. Oh, yeah. So we actually beat out that 



T. MULQUEEN 7 

cloud, because there's no way you could have 
driven through that. We were driving, and we 
stopped at one point and we looked and saw that 
we were outside the federal building. We ain't 
stopping here. So we went a few more blocks up. 

I remember Janice Olszewski just 
sitting there screaming, "Keep going. We're not 
far enough. We're not far enough. Just keep 
going." We just were all sitting in the back of 
the ambulance, what the hell just happened. I 
don't think it really even sunk in. 

We knew something had happened. I 
don't think we realized like the whole thing had 
come down, because we didn't even know -- she had 
said that something had collapsed, there was some 
kind of explosion, I don't know. We just got 
out, we stopped, and all of a sudden people just 
started coming out, all covered in the ash. 

Q. Where did you stop? 

A. I know we were outside of 385 Broadway 
at one point, because there was a lingerie shop 
there and the guy was so nice. He let us come 
in, let us use the bathroom, let us use the 
phones. I know the deli next had asked people 



T. MULQUEEN 8 

for quarters to use the phones, which I could not 
believe. This guy was like, "Whatever you need. 
What can I do?" He was just amazing. I'm going 
to make a point to go back there and thank him, 
because he was absolutely wonderful. 

I think we all sat down on the back of 
the bumper. We were trying to get dust masks, 
and we gave out all of our masks within a couple 
of minutes, because everybody was coming up. You 
could smell it. It's not a regular smoke smell. 
It's acrid concrete, whatever. We gave out dust 
masks . 

Then within I guess a couple minutes, 
people started coming out, making their way out 
of that cloud. There were some injuries. A lot 
of just completely petrified, shell-shocked -- I 
guess when you see pictures of people from other 
parts of the world after bombings and stuff, that 
shell-shocked look. 

When you see people in New York in 
business suits coming out covered in ash, looking 
like that, the whole thing -- surreal is 
definitely the only word that describes a lot of 
what went on that day, and afterwards too. 



T. MULQUEEN 9 

I know after a few minutes some guy 
came up, and he must have just run to the first 
deli he could find and bought all the water he 
could fit in his backpack and just came by and 
just started giving out water to people, which 
was -- I guess that was the beginning of people 
coming together and trying to do the right thing. 
People came by and bought sandwiches in a store 
and just tried to give us stuff. Somebody 
finally came by and was giving out like bottles 
of water, like the five gallon ones. 

Actually, this is interesting, just to 
go back. When we were driving up Broadway before 
we actually got there, there was a sheriff's car, 
and my husband is a deputy sheriff in the New 
York City sheriff's office. As we were driving 
by, I yelled at them, "Tell Paul Mulqueen that 
his wife is here." 

Because afterwards, maybe about half an 
hour, all I could think of is I know my husband 
works in Manhattan, I know he was there. I'm 
trying to focus on what I need to do, and people 
coming up cut and having trouble breathing. We 
had a few different oxygen bags and regulators 



T. MULQUEEN 10 

and stuff. You go into auto pilot and you try to 
do what you have to do, and all I could think 
about was where' s Paul, where' s Paul. Nobody 
could get through on the cell phones . 

I guess probably about 12-ish I saw 
another sheriff, and I said, "Could you please 
just try and raise him on the radio." He called 
him. Finally all I heard back, "What?" I 
thought, okay, he's okay, which I thought was 
very funny. The guy was like, "Lord, there was a 
family member looking for you." You could hear 
like the relief in his voice, and he was like, 
"Okay." But it was like "What?" 

I found out later he was helping to 
evacuate the fire. There was a picture. He was 
in like Time magazine and Newsweek magazine 
evacuating some of the victims out. I understand 
where that "what" came from at that point, but it 
was the happiest word I heard. 

I don't know how long we were there, 
but we were there for a while trying to just 
catch people as they were coming out, people were 
being carried out, limping up. Everybody was 
pretty banged up, although not as banged up as I 



T. MULQUEEN 11 

expected. I think a lot of us really expected 
worse injuries. It seemed like people were 
mostly either walking wounded or they didn't get 
out. It's unfortunate. 

Q. What street were you getting these 
injuries at? 

A. We were still in front of 385 Broadway. 

Q. On Broadway? 

A. Yeah, which I think is just south of 
Canal Street. 

It's funny, because the whole time too 
you don't realize how often you use the twin 
towers as your reference point, because for the 
next couple days I would look and I had no idea 
where I was. I would go to look up to see where 
the towers were. I guess that's something I'll 
have to get used to, but it was very strange. 
I know once -- 

Q. Were there other units there at that 
time? 

A. There was one other ambulance there. I 
think it was from the academy, because I know 
like Marlena Coffey was there and Jenna, she's 
from the academy. She was with a couple of other 



T. MULQUEEN 12 

people and some other EMTs that were closer that 
didn't get out of the cloud had come up. I know 
one guy's name was Kevin. He was covered in ash. 

I think after once we kind of got 
control of the scene there, everybody was just to 
the phone to try and call people, to just let 
them know that we're okay. I know when I got in 
touch with my aunt, she was hysterical, which 
started me off, the last thing you want. 

We were told to 85 with one of the 
deputy medical directors, so we met up with him 
at wherever that first treatment sector was on 
the West Side Highway there. There was all the 
ambulances, and all other people started coming 
in. I saw ambulances from New Jersey. My friend 
lives on North Shore. This funky big ambulance 
thing. I never saw a truck like it. 

We met up with Dr. Richmond, which 
apparently he and Commissioner Clair and Dario 
Gonzalez, the two physicians and the 
commissioner, were flown in from the state police 
from Albany, which was good. 

At that point Captain Olszewski was who 
we ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^| 



T. MULQUEEN 



13 



It. mulqueen 



I remember what struck me most is when 
we were on the east side and stuck in all that 
traffic, people were just going about their day. 
People were sitting at cafes eating. I know life 
goes on and stuff, but to see people -- it was 
almost like how could you just be going about 
your business? Don't you know what just 
happened? 



I saw her I don't know when, a couple 
days later. I had slept here a couple nights, 
and I ran into her one night. It was good to see 



T. MULQUEEN 15 

people. I never hugged so many people that I 
worked with in the space of a couple of days, 
ever . 

From the hospital we went to Bellevue 
to restock, because our bus was trashed. They 
had everything set up outside for restock. We 
had no oxygen, we had no masks, we had no water 
left for doing people's eyes and stuff. We were 
flushing them out. We had no gas. It was like 
everything you could run out of, we ran out of. 

We were standing at Bellevue. All of a 
sudden we hear this rumble of like a plane really 
low, and I started to freak out. Jimmy Murphy 
said, "It's okay. It's an F-15." I've never 
heard an F-15 before. I don't go to air shows or 
anything . 

But that plane and the rumble, 
especially because you hadn't heard a plane 
since; maybe a helicopter or two. But that 
sound, that was -- and just to see all these 
fighter jets over New York City was very, very 
strange . 

So then we restocked, and we were sent 
to Chelsea Piers. We pretty much spent the rest 



T. MULQUEEN 16 

of our night there. Actually how did I get to 
Chelsea Piers? Honestly I don't know where we 
went after Bellevue. All I know is at some point 
I got hooked up with Dr. Richmond and we ended up 
at Chelsea Piers. I don't know how I got there. 
Okay. That's pretty interesting. 

Q. It's common that people have gaps, 
because a lot of people don't recall big chunks 
of time from that day. 

A. I have no idea what I did. The next 
thing I know, it was nighttime and we were at 
Chelsea Piers and we were helping -- we got the 
morgue set up, which actually they never used, on 
the ice rink, which I thought it was actually a 
good idea. 

Yeah, just getting everything set up, 
all the hospitals, getting all the people -- 
everyone was just rushing in. Everybody knows 
about how many people we had volunteering their 
time, and just stuff, equipment. 

I remember at one point an unmarked 
truck pulls outside Chelsea Piers, and they start 
unloading it. You see just big brown boxes. I'm 
like, "Guys, I know I'm Miss Panic here, but did 



T. MULQUEEN 17 

anybody check those boxes? Where is this stuff 
from? It could be terrorist stuff." The FEMA 
guy standing next to me says, "Oh, maybe we 
should check the truck out." I was like oh, my 
God, you know. Who knew at that point? He was 
like, "Wow, that's a good idea." 

At some point that night, we went to go 
check out some of the -- I went with Dr. Richmond 
to ground zero from Chelsea, and I got to see a 
little bit of it. Words can't describe. You can 
see all the pictures and all the footage. I 
don't know if you guys were there or not, but it 
just looks like the gates of hell opened up. 
I've heard that from other people too. You can't 
describe that. 

Then we went back up, and we were 
finishing coordinating. I actually got home the 
first night, because my husband came and picked 
me up. That was good. That was very good. I 
was very, very thankful, very thankful. We're 
both the same type of people, we're there. 

I know my parents were in Walt Disney 
World, and they shut the whole park and wouldn't 
tell people why they started shutting people out. 



T. MULQUEEN 18 

A guy had a radio and told my parents, and my mom 
just flipped, because she knows where I work. 
She knows that when big things happen, we're out 
the door first. 

The only reason why I wasn't out the 
door with Dr. Cherson and Manny Delgado was 
because I was making my frigging bacon in the 
pantry. Who knows what would have happened had I 
been there. 

You hear all these stories. There were 
so many people that were just lucky because they 
were in the wrong place at the wrong time or the 
right place at the right time. That's two 
things: I had my bacon saved me, hopefully, and 
then Janice Olszewski stopping us in the middle 
of Broadway before we drove right into the thing. 
I'm very lucky and very happy. 

I came back the next morning, and I had 
met up with Dr. Cherson at that point. I spent 
the next couple of days with him. That's a very 
big blur. All I know is that by the end of the 
day I could barely walk, my feet hurt so much. 
My big toes are still numb now, because we were 
just on our feet for so many hours. The next 



T. MULQUEEN 19 

couple days I ended up just sleeping up here in 
one of the doc's offices. 

Oh, wait, no, I forgot this one. The 
next day we were -- after we were helping the 
setup -- they were setting up the northwest 
triage and treatment sector in the American 
Express building all of a sudden you started to 
hear that rumble again. Everybody just took off. 
Q. This is on the 12th? 

A. Yes. Apparently in the back some of 
the facade had been falling down, but you didn't 
know that. All you know is you heard that rumble 
again. We were all running. All of a sudden 
we're like "we're not far enough," which we heard 
a lot of them. 

All of sudden I see one of our EMTs 
coming up towards West Street, and he's starting 
to go in the building. I started screaming, "Get 
out of there!" One of the cops turned around and 
said, "Why are you screaming?" "Because you know 
what, I just ran for my frigging life again. If 
I'm a little high-strung right now, then you're 
going to have to understand that." 

This guy was going back in the 



T. MULQUEEN 2 

building. He's like, "Oh, okay. All right." 
Why are you screaming? Because he's walking 
towards a building that might be collapsing? I 
don't know, you know. It was just funny. 

We moved back, and then they checked it 
out. You see the back corner had collapsed a 
little bit. But they checked it out. Apparently 
the building was -- they used it for a triage and 
then the morgue. I think it's still being used, 
actually. I think the DMAT teams are in there 
now. 

I don't know what else you're looking 
for . 

Q. That's great. 

A. Kind of a rambling story. 

Q. That's what we're looking for. We're 
looking for your recollections, a narrative from 
you as to what you observed. We appreciate that. 

A. I'm just meeting people. I met one 
guy, one of my old partners, and he was off. He 
said his whole fire company's gone, the whole 
company. Just running into people like that. 
When you look at people that you're not going to 
see again, it's hard. It's very difficult. 



T. MULQUEEN 21 

Thank you. 
Q. Thank you very much for your 
recollections . 

MR. MCALLISTER: This is Kevin 
McAllister again. It is 12:12 on October 
4th, 2001, and we're going to conclude the 
interview now. The interview started at 
11:52 hours . 



File No. 9110012 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMT FELIPE TORRE 
Interview Date: October 9, 2001 



Transcribed by Elisabeth F. Nason 



F. TORRE 

MR. FEILER: Today's date is October 9, 
2001. The time now is 714 hours a.m. This is 
Lieutenant Monte Feiler with the Fire Department 
of the City of New York. I'm conducting an 
interview with the following individual. 
Q. Please state your name, rank and command? 
A. Felipe Torre, EMT, Battalion 50. 
Q. At Battalion 50, New York City Fire 
Department, EMS command, regarding the events of 
September 11, 2001. 

EMT Torre, if you can just begin and give me 
a scenario of where you were during the time frame of 
September 11 in the morning. 

A. That morning I started to do a second tour of 
overtime. We were coming out of New York Hospital 
Queens. We had just taken a patient there and we were 
redeployed to the World Trade Center incident. We gave 
the dispatcher an update when we got there and we made 
it to Broadway and Murray Street and that is as far as 
you could go, because we were stopped by numerous 
police personnel and civilians because a lot of people 
that were hurt and needed assistance. We radioed in 
and I notified the dispatcher, the Citywide dispatcher, 
that we were not able to make it to the staging area. 



F. TORRE 

My partner and I, we got out, took our 
equipment, and you know, we separated. He attended to 
some patients and I attended to another. In the 
process of helping other people, over the radio we also 
heard that the second tower was hit. A lot of 
pandemonium, a lot of people were really scared. So 
was I . We were trying to help as much and control as 
much people as we can. 

Then the first -- one of the towers fell 
down . 

Q. Did you see that? 

A. Yes. We were trying to help a couple of 
people into the ambulance and we got caught up in all 
that debris, you know. 

Q. Did you at any point go into any of the 
buildings? 

A. I was tending to some people at the CitiBank 
on Broadway and Murray. 

Q. They were being brought to you? 

A. They, the police stopped us. I think a 
couple of bank managers also were out and they hailed 
us. I believe I was helping some young lady that was 
cut, I believe it was on the leg. She was bleeding, 
then there was other people that were complaining of 



F. TORRE 

chest pain and they had respiratory distress and we 
were trying to see if we could get some other units to 
help us . 

Q. Were you parked on Broadway southbound? 

A. Yes. 

Q. North of Murray? 

A. Yes, and -- 

Q. You were flagged for injured people, you 
never actually got to whatever staging area you were 
told to go to? 

A. Right. We never made it there. All hell 
broke loose, because it came over my radio, people 
yelling to get out, they were bombing New York. So we 
never really finished providing care for these people, 
because they all panicked and they all stampede out. 
We followed out, because everybody was wanting to get 
out. The walls shook and then we felt it when a 
rumbling and some people were yelling earthquake. 

Q. Was your partner with you the whole time? 

A. We separated because there was so many people 
that wanted help. People, when we got to Manhattan, 
there was people already on their way out and people 
had fallen, people had shortness of breath, so he went 
one way and I went another. When the tower did fall, I 



F. TORRE 

didn't know where he was. He didn't know where I was. 
I personally got caught up in that big cloud of debris 
and the only thing I could think of was getting to the 
ambulance, which was parked. We had parked it, we left 
it right there. I know that we got caught up with a 
couple of the police officers and couple of civilians 
and all I can think of was just putting them in there 
and just easing the ambulance out and that's how we got 
out . 

Q. You drove of it out? 

A. We drove out of it yes, and we were advised 
to — 

Q. You found your partner, your partner came 
back out? 

A. Yes, he came back out. We also helped out 
Captain Olszewski, she, she came out of that rubble. 
We were all covered in that dust, but she was, I guess 
she was -- we were all choking, but she was really bad 
and I got her into the ambulance. I was trying to get 
as many people out and she had I guess stepped out, 
because I didn't know where she had went. 

Q. What was your unit number that day? 

A. I was 5 Adam. 

Q. Who was your partner that day? 



F. TORRE 

A. David Cira. 

Q. David? 

A. C-I-R-A. 

Q. Were you told a specific staging area to go 
to over the radio? 

A. Yes, they -- but they had changed it. I 
believe it was Vesey and West. I know it was Vesey 
Street, Vesey and I think the West Side Highway, as far 
as I can remember, but we never made it there. 

Q. Where did you say you were? 

A. We were at Broadway and Murray. 

Q. You were a few blocks away? 

A. Right. 

Q. What time do you think you got there, 
approximately? 

A. It was before the second plane hit I guess. 

Q. I guess 9:15. Anywhere around -- 

A. We got there before the second plane hit, so 
we got there after the first plane. Everybody was 
speculating that it was a possibility that it was a 
news helicopter that had lost control and slammed into 
the tower. 

Q. Where did you get that information from? 

A. It came through the KDT . It was something 



F. TORRE 

about an aircraft that I believe that I read, that it 
was a possibility that lost control. 

Q. You were on the scene for how long would you 
say before the second plane hit approximately? 

A. It seems like it happened so fast, but we 
were there when the second plane hit and we were there 
when the first tower collapsed. So I don't know, I 
guess you could say, what, 40 minutes. 

Q. You said at some point you had some civilians 
on board when you left that Broadway and Murray 
location? 

A. Yes, we never left, we, my partner and I, we 
separated. He went and helped out some people. I was 
helping out some people and the second plane hit and of 
course over my radio there was just a lot of people 
were yelling and they were talking about terrorists and 
they were talking about bombing, so everybody heard it 
and everybody panicked. It seemed like we were right 
there because the whole building shook and then the 
ambulance was right parked at the street. 

Q. Did you see any other apparatus go by, fire 
engines or EMS units? 

A. Yes, yes, I believe there was a Booth, a New 
York Hospital Queens unit. There was like two other 



F. TORRE 

units, but we all went separate ways because there were 
so many people that needed help. Then I guess, I don't 
know which tower fell down, but that caught us. All of 
a sudden, bright sunny day became pitch dark and we 
were all choking and we couldn't see and all I remember 
was get to the ambulance. I think I took about 6 
police officers that they also were caught up in there 
and I just told them get in the ambulance. I think I 
took like 2 or 3 civilians. I had no idea. 

I was afraid also because some of the people 
said look, there is a guy from EMS that is laying on 
the floor. They had told me. I said I didn't know if 
it was my partner or not. But you couldn't see 
anything. So I didn't know where that might be. We 
couldn't see anything. What I did was I did a U turn 
and edged my way out of that location, then my partner 
showed up like a block away. I stepped to the back and 
he took us out of there. They told us whatever patient 
we get, take them out of Manhattan, so we just 
notified, we asked for a stand by at New York Hospital 
Queens. I believe it was like 6 officers, about 3 
civilians that we brought in. That was it. I came 
back . 

Q. Did you see any other EMS personnel besides 



F. TORRE 

those going by, anyone in the street, any officers, EMS 
officers? 

A. Like I said we were helping out Captain 
Olszewski. She wasn't doing too good, but then she 
stepped out. We washed her face. 

Q. Do you know where she went? 

A. No, I, you know, I told her to stay, she 
wasn't doing too good, but came back to Queens and we 
started seeing -- she had walked out, so I don't know 
where she had gone. But that, I do remember that. I 
saw a lot of other people, EMS people, but I don't 
recognize them. They could have been Manhattan units. 
Everybody was doing something. 

Q. You met your partner one block away, where 
would that be? 

A. You know, we were on Murray and Broadway. I 
made a U turn, so I'm not sure if it was on Broadway 
that we were on or on Murray, but -- I don't know, I 
really couldn't tell you a precise, but thank god when 
I saw him I was relieved, because everybody told me 
that he was hurt. 

Q. He had patients with him at that time? 

A. No, no. Because I had the ambulance. He had 
came out and whoever we were helping, everybody was 



10 
F. TORRE 



just going crazy. Then after that it was trying to 
help your own selves. 

Q. And you transported to a hospital? 

A. New York Hospital, Queens, the old Booth 
Memorial . 

Q. You weren't there when the second building 
collapsed? 

A. I don't think so. I don't know which one had 
collapsed, but we were there when. 

Q. The first one came down? 

A. Yes, one of them came down. I took police 
officers from the -- the Bronx, the 49 precinct. 

Q. Did you get their names, were you ever able 
to get their names? 

A. Oh, yes, we did ACR's on them. Yes, we did 
ACR's. I'm not sure. I think it was like 6 officers 
and about 3 civilians. We tried our best. I know that 
one of them suffered, one of the civilians, an older 
lady, she suffered an MI, and I think one of the 
officers had an asthma attack. We all, they were all, 
I was trying to give everybody time on the oxygen, 
because there was two on board and the two on the 
portable bags that we had and I had like 6 cops and 3 
civilians, something like that, so we were trying to 



11 

F. TORRE 



help each other, as well as myself. We took them to 
the hospital and that's all I know. They told me to 
come back here. 

Q. You came back to the Battalion? 

A. Yes. 

Q. You never responded back? 

A. No, no. I never went back there. Besides, 
the ambulance wasn't fit to go back. It was just 
filled with all that dust and a lot of the people had 
either vomited or spit it all over. 

Q. When the first building collapsed, you and 
your partner were separated, you were by yourself 
tending to patients? 

A. Well, when we got there we never made it to 
the staging, because a lot of the police officers just 
flagged us down and I recall that they flagged us down 
at Broadway and Murray. We were in front of the, I 
believe it was CitiBank. The employees of the banks 
said look, we got a lot of people that are hurt. There 
was a young lady that had a laceration, I believe. I 
don't know if it was to the foot or leg. That's when a 
short time later, that's when the second plane hit, so 
I never got a chance to finish trying to control 
bleeding . 



12 
F. TORRE 



There was also people that were complaining 
of chest pains and stuff like that. So I never got a 
chance to see all these people because once the second 
plane hit, it came over the radio that terrorists and 
bombing, so of course, everybody all panicked, got out 
and just started running and the lady with the cut, I 
don't know where she went. We all ended up outside. 
That's when one of the towers fell. 

Q. Where were you at that point when the first 
tower fell? 

A. At that location, Broadway and Murray. 

Q. In the street or in the CitiBank? 

A. We had came out because we didn't know what 
was going on. First they said they were bombing New 
York. A lot of people were talking about earthquakes 
and everybody just scattered. Somebody had told me 
that my partner was hurt and then all you could see is 
that big cloud. We can hear the rumbling, you could 
hear. We just saw that cloud, we turned around and it 
all caught us. I was with the -- I can't remember her 
name, but it was a police officer, female police 
officer . 

She grabbed on to me. She got scared. I was 
scared, because we heard all that rumbling and we could 



13 
F. TORRE 



only imagine that parts of the tower was falling down. 
My concern was if we stay there we were going to get 
hit. But like I said, day turned to night and all I 
could think of was get to the ambulance, because I knew 
we had oxygen there and at least we can at least inch 
our way out. But when they heard the radio, a lot of 
people just made like a Cuban chain. She clinged on to 
me and then they clinged on to her and I said look, 
let's get in the ambulance, get some oxygen, we had 
water. We were able to wash our faces out. 

So like I said, there was about I think 6 
officers. They brought I think about 3 civilians came 
in. As much as I could get in and I turned around and 
we inched our way out and then thank god my partner 
showed up and we notified them that we were taking them 
to the old Booth. 

Q. You were working off a radio, do you remember 
what channel you were on? 

A. Citywide. 

Q. Did you always stay on that channel, were you 
initially on that channel or did you ever change to it 
and did you change any other frequency after that? 

A. No, afterwards they told us to stay on 
Citywide. We were -- 



14 
F. TORRE 



Q. You were initially on Queens? 

A. We were on Queens, right. We were on Queens, 
then they told us to switch to Citywide. A lot of 
people were calling for help. I was calling for help. 
We just notified them that we were going to go to the 
Queens Hospital. 

Q. Okay. Was there any persons from people that 
you can identify being on the scene, any other 
uniformed workers that you know by name, any paramedics 
or EMTs that you know that you saw while you were 
operating on the scene until you left the scene that 
you saw present there? 

A. You know, I saw a few people, but I don't 
know their names. The only one that I can recall was 
Captain Olszewski. I saw Hunter units that were also 
there. Metro Care units. 

Q. EMS officers, other than the Captain, that's 
the only one you saw? 

A. I saw other officers, but like I said I don't 
know them by name. 

Q. Were they running away from the building, 
were they running into another building? 

A. When we first got there, there were two units 
pulled up. We got there and like I said a lot of 



15 
F. TORRE 



people stopped us, so we never made it to the staging 
or to the triage. Then they pulled up, I believe it 
was New York Hospital Queens paramedic ambulance. They 
also tended to other people saying that they was having 
chest pains. I think Saint Vincent's Catholic Medical 
Center paramedic ambulance was also there. 

Q. But you can't identify who the individuals 
were? 

A. I can remember their faces, because they work 
here in Queens, but I don't know their names offhand. 

Q. You saw them again afterwards that same day 
or -- 

A. No, I haven't seen them recently that I 
recall. If they show me pictures or something, I bet I 
can recall them. 

Q. Okay. Any fire officers did you see that you 
know, that you would know who they are? 

A. By me, no. 

MR. FEILER: At this time I would like to ask 

the other interviewers to state their name, rank 

and command. 

MS. ROM: Lieutenant Pat Rom, from the Bureau 

of Investigations and Trials. 

MS. MAGGI: EMT Diana Maggi from 



16 
F. TORRE 



Investigations and Trials. 

Q. Is there anything else that you would like to 

add before we conclude the interview that you think is 

important? 

A. No. 

MR. FEILER: At this time we will conclude 
the interview. I want to thank you for your time 
in assisting us with this. The time now is 7:35 
a.m. This will conclude the interview. 



File No. 9110013 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMT ANTHONY BARTOLOMEY 
Interview Date: October 9, 2001 



Transcribed by Nancy Francis 



A. BARTOLOMEY 

MS. BASTEDENBECK: Today's date is October 
9th, 2001. The time is 0916 hours. This is Christine 
Bastedenbeck of the Fire Department of the City of New 
York. I'm with Christopher Eccleston. We're 
conducting an interview with the following individual: 

Q. Please state your name, rank, title, and your 
assigned command of the Fire Department regarding the 
events of September 11th, 2001. 

A. My name is Anthony Bartolomey, an EMT 
assigned to EMS Battalion 4. 

Q. What unit were you working on September 11? 

A. 02 Bravo Tour I. 

Q. Who were you working with on that day? 

A. Pasquale Felitti. 

Q. On that morning, were you assigned to the 
World Trade Center? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Approximately what time? 

A. At approximately 8:55 a.m. 

Q. At approximately what time did you arrive? 

A. At about 8:58. 

Q. On your way there, were you able to see 
anything that was happening? 

A. Debris floating in the air from the towers, 



A. BARTOLOMEY 

people running away from the towers and vehicles left 
abandoned in the street. We were approaching from 
Broadway coming westbound on Cortlandt Street. There 
were two taxicabs and a soda truck left abandoned by 
their drivers. My partner actually got out of the 
vehicle and pulled the vehicles over to the side so we 
could get the ambulance through. We made a right turn 
onto Church Street, parked on Church and Fulton in 
front of the Millenium Hotel on the southeast corner. 

Q. When you arrived there, did any civilians 
report anything to you? 

A. Yes. Numerous civilians were telling me that 
a plane had hit the building. There were discrepancies 
as to the type of plane. Some were saying it was a 
Cessna or Leer jet type, a small jet plane. Some said 
it was a large passenger plane. One person actually 
said that it was like a military style plane that 
actually shot missiles into the building. 

Q. Who did you report to when you first got 
there? 

A. When we got there, there were no supervisors 
on the scene. We reported to a paramedic unit from New 
York Downtown, I believe it was 1 Victor. They're 
paramedics based out of Beekman Downtown Hospital. 



A. BARTOLOMEY 

They had had their vehicle on the corner of Vesey and 
Church, on the southwest corner, in front of 5 World 
Trade by Borders Bookstore. They already had three 
patients in their vehicle. There were more patients 
approaching as we had gotten there. So we grabbed our 
equipment out of our vehicle and walked up a block to 
them. It was them and a crew from 1 Adam was there 
also treating some patients . Nobody had established 
staging at that time yet, or, if they had, it hadn't 
come up over the radio. So pretty much we stayed where 
we were and started to treat patients there. 

Q. That was where; at the corner of -- 

A. The corner of Vesey and Church Street. 

Q. Okay. Then just tell me the events that you 
remember happening. 

A. Then as we were starting to treat some more 
patients, we heard rumbling. We thought maybe it was 
debris falling from the tower. You look up and you see 
the flame of the plane hitting the second building. 
When you see the footage on TV, you see it fly in one 
side and the fireball shot out through the other side. 
We actually saw the fireball shot out from the north 
side of that building. 

Everybody got behind the vehicle to brace 



A. BARTOLOMEY 

themselves against any debris that was coming down. 
Debris came down. There was glass and metal hitting 
the ground around us . That ' s when we decided to get 
out of that area because we didn't know what else was 
going to come down on us . So we got the people that 
were able to walk from there, we got them to walk, got 
ourselves out of there. 

I'm not sure where my partner went after 
that. I went towards the subway station on Church 
Street in front of that cemetery. It's by the Trinity 
Church annex. Because people were standing there just 
like deer in the headlights kind of thing, just 
staring . 

Q. Did you walk at that point? 

A. I ran, actually. 

Q. You ran. Okay. 

A. It was only across the street because we were 
on the west side of the street. The subway station is 
on the east side. There's a double entrance. Two 
stairways converge into one. They go down into the 
mezzanine level. People were just standing there. I 
was telling them get down, get underground, because 
they're sitting there while stuff is still falling on 
them. So I get them down there. 



A. BARTOLOMEY 

That's where I started finding patients and 
apparently somebody was there with -- I guess he must 
have been treated and the crew that was there ran and 
he got left behind because he had a cervical collar and 
he had a triage tag around his neck. So I had a couple 
of civilians help me carry him down the stairs to the 
bottom, to the mezzanine level, where the token clerk 
is, put him there, and then they had another patient 
who was a female. She had fallen and hit her head. 
She had a lump about the size of a golf ball on her 
forehead. She was going in and out of consciousness. 
We put her down next to the other guy. Then there was 
an elderly female who felt weak in the legs and was 
unable to walk. So now I had three patients there in 
front of the token booth. 

So I go back upstairs, come up on the radio, 
let them know, you know, I'm half crew. I don't know 
where my partner is. I've got three patients not able 
to walk. I need somebody to get them out of there 
because at that point I had no equipment on me either. 
Slowly but surely the police started coming down with 
some equipment to help carry the patients out. We got 
the third one out of there. I forget exactly what 
time. It was right before the towers fell, which that 



A. BARTOLOMEY 

was about between 9:55 and 10:00, approximately. 
Because we had gotten back upstairs with the last 
patient and there was nobody around. There were police 
officers there saying the tower was in danger of 
collapse and so they were evacuating the immediate 
area . 

So we went up one block to Barclay Street. 
We were still on Church walking northbound. We got to 
St. Peter's Church, and I'm not sure who these people 
were, I'm not sure if they were federal or plainclothes 
police officers also, told us start setting up a triage 
over in front of St. Peter's Church because at this 
point nobody really was sure where everybody was 
going. So anybody who could walk was walking, getting 
out of the immediate area. 

So we still had this one guy on a long board 
with a collar on him, and they brought one other person 
over who was in a stair chair. I forget exactly what 
his injuries were. I believe he had hurt his ankle or 
something like that. That's when we heard the rumbling 
of the tower starting to collapse and we started to get 
people inside the church because you saw the cloud of 
the smoke and the soot that was kicked up when the 
tower fell. At the rate of speed it was coming up the 



A. BARTOLOMEY 

street, we weren't going to be able to outrun it, so we 
decided the best bet would be to get back in inside. 
We got who we could inside. I got caught outside of 
the church when the dust cloud overcame me and then I 
felt my way back in. There were some other officers 
and people inside the church, and we waited there until 
the dust subsided a little bit so we could get out. 

At that point I lost track of time. I 
couldn't tell you exactly what time everything happened 
after that. We get outside I was complaining my throat 
was burning from breathing in -- I don't think how long 
I was outside breathing in all the soot and 
everything. There was a unit from Booth Memorial 
Hospital, another ambulance unit. They already had 
patients in their vehicle. They took me and told me to 
go with them, and then they brought me up to Roosevelt 
Hospital . 

Q. And you became a patient there? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Where were you when the second tower 
collapsed? 

A. I'm not sure because, like I said, I lost 
track of time. So I'm not sure if I was still in the 
church when the second tower came down because we were 



A. BARTOLOMEY 

in there for quite a while before you could see outside 
enough to step out because the soot and the dust, the 
black in the sky to the point where it looked like it 
was nighttime outside. 

Q. You said you ended up going to the hospital 
with a Booth Memorial unit? 

A. Yes. 

Q. In the time that you were down at the scene 
of the Trade Center, did you run into any EMTs or 
paramedics that you knew? 

A. I ran into one, but I didn't know him. He 
said he was from Brooklyn. 

Q. Was he on duty or off duty, in a uniform? 

A. He had the uniform shirt, but he was wearing 
jeans, so I'm assuming he was off duty at the time. 

Q. But you didn't know his name? 

A. I didn't know who he was. He just said he 
worked out of Brooklyn. 

Q. The only place you went prior to the collapse 
was into the subway station? 

A. Yes. 

Q. And that was -- 

A. The E train. It's the World Trade Center 
station of the E train. 



10 
A. BARTOLOMEY 



Q. From which street did you enter into that? 

A. From Church Street in between I believe it's 
Cortlandt -- no. Fulton and Vesey. Right here in 
front of St. Paul's cemetery. 

Q. You never went into the Trade Center 
buildings themselves? 

A. No. The closest I got was in the front, 
right here, where Borders Bookstore was, which is right 
over here. That was as close as I got. I never 
actually went inside the building, no. 

Q. So for the first collapse you had gone to St. 
Peter's Church? 

A. Yes. 

Q. As the building came down and the cloud of 
smoke approached you, you felt your way into the 
church? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Then you came outside and you're not even 
aware of when the second tower came down? 

A. No. 

Q. Do you know approximately what time you 
became a patient? 

A. That would probably be around between 10:30 
and 11:00. I have the paperwork from the hospital. I 



11 

A. BARTOLOMEY 



don't have it with me. But it would tell you what time 
I got to the hospital and the time I was released. 

Q. Okay. Is there anything else that you'd like 
to include in the interview, anything you want to say? 

A. No, that's about it. 

MS. BASTEDENBECK: Then this concludes the 
interview with EMT Anthony Bartolomey. The time now is 
9:28 on October 9, 2001. 



File No. 9110014 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMTD CHRISTOPHER KAGENAAR 
Interview Date: October 9, 2001 



Transcribed by Nancy Francis 



C . KAGENAAR 

MR. RADENBERG: Today is September 9th, 
2001. The time is 1533 hours. This is Paul Radenberg 
of the Fire Department, City of New York. I am 
conducting an interview with the following individual: 

Q. Please state your name, rank and title. 

A. EMTD Christopher John Kagenaar. 

Q. Your assigned command? 

A. My assigned command is Battalion 31. 

Q. Of the Fire Department, City of New York? 

A. That is correct. 

Q. We are at EMS Battalion 31. This interview 
is regarding the events of September 11th, 2001. 
All yours. This is not so much by the 
questions but what you recall. 

A. Pretty much coming out of the station, 
because the station is always overlooking the World 
Trade Center, that as we got the signal over the KDT 
and we were pulling out of the station, I thought it 
was like a little fire, and then we come out and 
there's like people from Cumberland Hospital looking up 
at it and there was like black, thick smoke coming out 
of the World Trade Center Tower 1 and we're like, wow, 
this is real, because you really didn't know how bad it 
was until we got over the Brooklyn Bridge, when we got 



C . KAGENAAR 

near the Brooklyn Bridge. It looked like a war zone. 
Cops, firemen, vehicles, all the lights heading over 
the bridge. It was crazy. It was like it was a 
movie . 

Then as soon as we got over there, as soon as 
we got off of the Brooklyn Bridge, the people were 
running like it was a Godzilla movie, and we had to 
stop there for a while. People were overcome, were 
shaken, were scared, minor cuts and bruises, and we had 
to stop and do that, and there was a Lieutenant that 
showed up and said, look, you guys have to get over to 
the scene. You guys can't stay here. So finally when 
PD got control of the area, we moved over to I think it 
was Church. I think it was Church area. 

What happened was then the second plane hit 
the tower, and it was a loud noise, I mean, it hit, and 
at first I was like this can't be happening. It's like 
lightning doesn't strike twice. Then the second plane 
hit the tower, so now we know, oh, my God, what's 
really going on here now? 

So it was just a lot of confusion, everybody 
started running again, and then we set up and we 
started treating people, I mean, minor cuts and 
scrapes, and some people had serious damage. 



C . KAGENAAR 

MR. TAMBASCO: Do you recall where you were 
when this was happening? I don't know if the map would 
help you at all. 

Q. When you first came off the bridge, the 
Brooklyn Bridge, do you remember where you were? 

A. We were over here on Church. Because he was 
Haz-Tac, so I had to set up like 200 feet away and 
stuff. 

Q. So on Church Street somewhere? 

A. Right. 

Q. Somewhere on Church. You were down by the 
towers? 

A. Yes, I was down by the towers. 

Q. Okay. 

A. Then, when the second tower came down, 
everybody started running, big cloud of smoke. I left 
the truck open because I couldn't find Harris and I 
dove down a train station. Then I came back up on 
Reade and I got back in there and came back to the 
scene and I see my ambulance. It was still there, but 
it was like full of dust and soot. Because in case 
Harris could have made it to the truck, he could have 
dove in the truck to save himself. There was just 
total devastation. I've never seen anything like it 



C . KAGENAAR 

before in my life. So Russell had -- 

Q. Your partner, Russell? 

A. Right. Russell Harris. 

Q. He hadn't left you while you were there; you 
were still with the ambulance? 

A. Right. I had to be with the ambulance while 
he went in to go Haz-Tac, to suit up. 

Q. Oh, okay. All right. So he was suiting up 
with the Haz-Tac stuff? 

A. Right. 

Q. Then you lost sight of him? 

A. Right. 

Q. Do you remember where the train station was 
that you went in? 

A. No. I didn't even look. I just dove down 
the train station. Then I walked for like a little bit 
and I came back out when all the dust and soot cleared 
and everything. 

Q. Where did you go from there? 

A. I went right back to the truck. 

Q. Right back to the truck? 

A. Right back to the truck because I thought 
maybe he could have made it to the truck. 

Q. Then you stayed there? 



C . KAGENAAR 

A. I stayed there. I met up with somebody whose 
name is Morrison. He was off duty and he showed up. 

Q. An EMS guy? 

A. Yes, an EMS guy. He showed up with shorts 
and Timberland boots and he just wanted to help out. 
So I was like, that's it, you're with me, we're going 
to stick together, and we went over to the staging. 
But we also had to run when the first tower came down. 
It was like the first time you thought it was 
impossible and then the second time it happened, too. 

Q. So Russell was still with you when the first 
one came down or he was gone? In other words, you got 
there, set up, and he went and set up? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Okay. 

A. I was mostly doing like treating patients and 
then a Citywide ambulance would come up and something 
like that, you know, hey, take this patient. 

Q. So when the first tower came down, that's 
when you went down into the subway, or the second one? 

A. The first tower. 

Q. The first one. Then you stayed there? 

A. Yes. Then the second tower, when the second 
tower was coming down, we grabbed as much people and 



C . KAGENAAR 

personnel as we could, threw them in the back of the 
ambulance, and we went two blocks and we went down this 
way so we had the building protecting us as the -- it 
was nasty because there was such a thick, brown smoke, 
it was like everything was gone, and it was like that 
for a while. 

Q. So you were heading uptown? 

A. Yes. 

Q. I got you. 

A. Trying to keep the vehicle, one, intact, and 
also to try to get -- because I had loaded the back of 
the ambulance with people just to get them out of the 
area, cops, firemen, ATF agents, whatever. 

Q. Anybody who got in. 

A. Yes. Pretty much get in, get in, let's go. 
Morrison drove and we turned up this way and we just 
stood there and we waited until that big dust thing 
blew on everything. It was like a blizzard. 

Q. But you had the other building -- 

A. Yes. 

Q. Do you remember what street you wound up on? 

A. No. I wasn't even looking. 

Q. Someplace north. 

A. Then they told all the units to start heading 



C . KAGENAAR 

over to Chelsea Piers, and we went over there and we 
just stood there. Then they told us, okay, now you're 
going to go over to Reade and Greenwich. We went to 
Reade and Greenwich. We stood there. Then the 911 
calls kept coming in, but it was like the calls that 
came in at 9:00 o'clock in the morning and we were 
backlogged. They started coming back in and like 7 
World Trade Center -- 

Q. You were hearing all this over the radio? 

A. Yes. So every time we tried to like -- we'd 
see a unit go out of staging and it would go back in, 
we're like hoping they won't come back. But they came 
back. So it was getting real depressing. Then finally 
they moved us over by the Staten Island Ferry and we 
just sat there until we got released. Pretty much we 
just stood there like hoping for something to do. We 
didn't see anything. 

Q. Just one other question. When you were 
talking about that Lieutenant before, when you first 
got there, was that an EMS Lieutenant? 

A. Yes, it was EMS. 

Q. It was. Okay. You don't know who it was? 

A. No. Pretty much I remember there was a Chief 
Vilani who was in charge of the Staten Island Ferry and 



C . KAGENAAR 

he was like keeping us going and stuff. He was like, 
you know, we lost a lot of people, we don't know who, 
but we've got to keep going. So it was kind of nice to 
hear him talk like that. He was very like, you know, 
keep us going, like got us food and they set up phones 
for us and everything. 

Q. That was Vilani? 

A. Yes, Vilani. 

Q. EMT Morrison, do you know him or do you know 
where he works? 

A. He works in the 57. 

Q. Battalion 57? 

A. Right. 

Q. Did you see any other EMS people that you 
remember? 

A. Well, I was glad to see everybody from my 
station was okay because there was a couple that we 
still didn't know about until the end of the night 
because we got spread out all over the place. 

Q. When did you finally wind up catching up with 
Russell? 

A. Actually, I have a Nextel and he finally got 
ahold of me when he was in the hospital. He told me 
I'm in Brooklyn Hospital. 



10 
C . KAGENAAR 



Q. He was able to get you by phone. 

A. Yes. Radios, they were saying no 
unauthorized transmissions, only supervisors and 
officers got to use the radio and everything. 

Q. I guess that's about it, unless you have 
anything else you want to say. 

A. Well. . . 

Q. Feel free. 

A. I mean, everything went well. You thought it 
would have been chaos with everybody running around, 
not knowing what to do, but pretty much it was 
something, it was a disaster, but there was like 
order. There was still a chain of command. 

Q. Very good. Thanks. 

A. No problem. 

MR. RADENBERG: The time is now 1542. The 
interview is concluded. 



File No. 9110015 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMT RUSSELL HARRIS 
Interview Date: October 9, 2001 



Transcribed by Nancy Francis 



R. HARRIS 

MR. TAMBASCO: Today is October 9th. My name 
is Mike Tambasco assigned to the World Trade Center 
Task Force. We're doing an interview today regarding 
the events of September 11th at the Trade Center. In 
the room with me is Investigator. . . 

MR. RADENBERG: Paul Radenberg. 

MR. TAMBASCO: The subject of the interview 
is . . . 

EMT HARRIS: Russell Harris, Battalion 31, 
Unit 31 Henry Tour 2. 

Q. Russ, if you can, just start right from the 
beginning and just tell me everything that you saw, you 
felt, you did, to the best of your memory. 

A. That particular morning, my unit that I was 
relieving, which was 31 Henry Tour 1, came in a little 
late. Ironically, they parked it at the top of the 
hill, which they never do. They always park down here 
at the garage. So by the time that we signed for our 
equipment and we were going out to the unit, my 
partner, who was Mr. Kagenaar, he happened to look over 
out the gate and saw that the World Trade was on fire. 
When he initially told me that, I thought it was a 
joke. I was opening up the side door and placing my 
equipment in because I was teching that day. I looked 



R. HARRIS 

over as well and saw that it was on fire. 

Subsequently to that the dispatcher called me 
maybe 30 seconds, 45 seconds later, and stated they 
wanted us to respond to a job. But the funny part was 
the job wasn't to the World Trade Center. It was at 
350 Fifth Avenue, which is the Empire State Building. 
So my partner was driving and he clearly stated to me 
he didn't know Manhattan that well. So during the 
course of going over the bridge, he really didn't know 
which direction to go to. So we got off going towards 
Park Row, which is right in front of City Hall. 

Well, by the time we passed City Hall, there 
was a melee of traffic and my partner had to tie on 
brakes for people who were running madly coming down 
Park Row in front of J & R. So we actually got caught 
and had to make that left turn and got stuck right 
there. As we did that, a few unmarked RMPs also were 
stuck. One of them was a police officer I had known. 
His name is Claude. He's a detective. So as I'm 
sitting there talking to Claude trying to figure out 
where he was responding and what was going on, we 
happened to look back at the Trade and we saw the 
second plane hit, bam. 

At the same time, about three city buses were 



R. HARRIS 

coming past. So we stopped the city buses and we 
cleared out all of the passengers and we asked the 
buses -- 

Q. They were going downtown? 

A. They were going towards the Brooklyn Bridge. 
We asked the buses to sit at the foot of the Brooklyn 
Bridge so in the event that there were any walking 
wounded, we could throw them on the buses and send them 
over the bridge. Well, as we were doing that, a Fire 
Lieutenant came and approached me and he asked what 
unit I was, and I told him, and he said all the Hazmat 
units are staging down at West and Vesey and he needed 
me to suit up. 

So I explained to him that my partner wasn't 
Hazmat certified and I was unable to suit up. He said, 
don't worry. You go down there and somebody can help 
you suit up. I want you to go in the building. We've 
got a team there. We want to go in and we're doing 
search and rescue. So I said, well, I still can't do 
it. He said, look. After you do this, you don't 
really have a lot of patients because they're walking 
wounded. They're okay. I want you to just gather up, 
and he told me to go down to West and Vesey. 

Well, at the same time, like I said, there 



R. HARRIS 

was a melee of people running. Smoke and debris was 
going everywhere. So my partner once again jumped 
behind the wheel, we got in, put on the lights and 
siren, and we were able to make it down to Church and 
Park. At Church and Park, the FBI told us, this is our 
staging, this was where we had to stop, we couldn't 
cross their barriers. They were setting up barriers. 
At that time I saw everybody coming, Housing police, 
DEP, Corrections, court officers. 

Q. Private. 

A. Court officers. I looked back at the 
building and I saw all this black smoke and 
everything. Well, as soon as I stopped, my partner and 
myself, we opened the door, I got out my Hazmat 
equipment and I was starting to put it on the hood of 
the thing, of the vehicle. We had a walking wounded 
come and he was cut severely to his left arm and his 
left upper thigh. 

Q. Civilian? 

A. Civilian. He was lacerated bad. So we put 
him right in the bus. My partner started wrapping him 
up, you know, stabilizing the bleeding, took his 
pressure and everything, and at that time, FBI and a 
police Captain came and they asked me could I move my 



R. HARRIS 

vehicle up another block and that we had a temporary 
triage down at St. Peter's Church, which is at Church 
and Barclay. So I said all right. The patient was 
stable, vital signs were normal. We packed him up. So 
I told my partner, put him in the chair. Since I have 
the Hazmat mask and my helmet, I'll go down there and 
drop him off at the church in the chair and I'll come 
back. So I took the patient down to the church. Once 
again, a Fire Lieutenant came up to me. He saw me 
dropping off the patient and he advised me -- 

Q. If I can interrupt you one second, who was at 
the triage center over there? 

A. There was an FBI agent. That's the only one 
I saw outside. I never actually made it in the 
building. As I'm dropping off the patient, the FBI 
agent comes up to me and he says, oh, man, I just heard 
there's a third plane coming in. So I look at the 
patient, I'm at the church, and I said, well, look, 
there's nothing else I could do for you right now. 
You're here and you can hop upstairs and you can go in 
the church and that's where you could be safe. 

As I said that and he turned around, all this 
black smoke started filling and I looked at the 
building and it started vibrating. So I was almost 



R. HARRIS 

next to the cemetery at that time. I was on the side 
of the church. I looked and all this debris just 
started exploding everywhere, and I turned around to 
run and I didn't see the patient anymore, and myself 
and the FBI guy just started going down that block. 

Q. Were you going north? 

A. Going north over towards Broadway. 

Q. Right. 

A. So I think that was Vesey I turned down at 
the time because I was on the side of the church. I 
went up Vesey. When I got maybe halfway the block, I 
got knocked to the ground. My helmet got cracked. A 
piece of debris had hit my helmet. So I quickly got 
up, put the helmet back on, and I was still running. 
There was black smoke everywhere. I couldn't see 
anything. By the time I got to Broadway, I looked 
around the corner. Because debris was flying, I wanted 
to make sure I just didn't get knock unconscious, and I 
looked and I just saw parts of things just flying past 
me. So I stopped and took a deep breath and just ran 
across and I made a left on Broadway. By that time I 
made it to City Hall. 

When I got to City Hall, people were -- they 
were just in chaos trying to climb the gates and the 



R. HARRIS 

fences and get in. Somebody noticed I was in the Fire 
Department EMS uniform, so they brought this lady up to 
me and I was out of breath. They said this lady is 
having chest pains. I said, well, I don't have an 
ambulance. I have a radio, but I can't communicate 
because we were having communication problems. I said, 
but if she wants, she can gladly follow me because I'm 
going to go where you can get some help. So I guess 
they understood that at that time everything was all 
chaotic and there was nothing I could do, and everybody 
just started following me and I told them stay away 
from the larger buildings and really going into City 
Hall wasn't a great thing. So we all started moving 
downward going towards the Supreme Court. 

So by the time I got to the Municipal 
Building and I turned around to look to see if debris 
had stopped falling, the second building started coming 
down. By that time everybody took off again. So I 
looked to see and I had noticed at that time I didn't 
know where my partner was and the radio was chaotic. I 
couldn't go over the radio. My partner and myself just 
happen to have Nextel radios, but we couldn't 
communicate because the satellite went down. So I 
said, well, as soon as I get over here, down past the 



R. HARRIS 

courts, I'll probably be able to get a signal and I'll 
keep trying him. 

At that time I ran into a young man named 
Mr. Medina. He works for Long Island College Hospital, 
but that day he was working up at Beth Israel. When I 
reflected back after speaking to him, because he came 
up to me, he was out of breath, he had a working cell 
phone and I had the working part of a radio, and he had 
told me he lost his partner. I said you know what? 
While I was standing there, I noticed a Beth Israel bus 
and it got crushed, so maybe you should just keep 
coming with me. Then I noticed I was hopping and my 
leg was swelling up. 

Q. The Beth Israel bus was where? 

A. The Beth Israel bus was right back at the 
World Trade Center. 

Q. About where you were parked? 

A. Right around the corner. But they were 
closer in front of the building. So he decided he 
would stay with me. We kept trying to communicate. We 
called Citywide. They referred us to RCC. We called 
RCC and we gave them both of our shield numbers and 
told them we were all right and that I was trying to 
get into Brooklyn to get to the hospital because my leg 



10 
R. HARRIS 



was just swelling up. He kept calling on his cell 
phone to try to update them to where we were so there 
wouldn't be a problem, and then he was telling them 
that we'd lost our partners. 

By the time I got down to -- there's a park 
over there around Bowery, maybe a block over from the 
Manhattan Bridge. We sat down for a moment and debris 
was still coming down. It made it all the way down to 
that park. That's a little past Canal Street. We were 
able to catch our breath and get through and let them 
know I was fine, and he told me, if I'd be all right, 
he'd like to head back because he wanted to find his 
partner. So I told him, you go ahead, and he said, no, 
I can't leave you until I know you're all right. 

So he walked me back towards the Manhattan 
Bridge and we noticed all these people going over the 
bridge and they were stopping the trucks and cars, and 
he saw private green sanitation truck and he went up to 
the guy and said can you take my partner in to Brooklyn 
so he can go to the hospital, and as he said that, some 
of the people overheard him and they came and they 
grabbed me and lifted me up and they put me in the back 
of the dumper in the back of the sanitation truck. 

So as I'm coming over, I hear my partner come 



11 

R. HARRIS 



over Citywide and he says my partner is in the 
building. Because he heard them advise me to get 
dressed and go in the building, he assumed when I went 
to drop off the patient they took me in the building, 
so I was in the building. I heard him and they told 
him unauthorized transmission, only Chiefs and above 
can be on Citywide at this time. So I went back over 
the radio and told him I'm not crushed in the 
building. I'm going over the bridge. So I'm all right 
and I'll talk to you later. 

When I got halfway over the bridge, people 
started looking back because this thing starts smoking 
again. They thought something else was going to 
happen. They stopped all the traffic in the middle of 
the bridge. So I had decided I would get off this 
garbage truck and keep hopping until I got into 
Brooklyn. Once I got off, though, I noticed there was 
a firefighter coming across the bridge and he was 
holding his radio, and he was covered in soot and he 
was talking on his radio but he didn't have a battery 
on the radio. 

So we both made it about the same time to 
Tillary Street and this lady was driving past and she 
stopped and she picked me up and she brought me to the 



12 
R. HARRIS 



station here. I don't even know what happened to the 
firefighter. But once I got here, I made it the best 
way I could to the hospital because we didn't have any 
vehicles or anything. Actually, the battalion was 
closed off. They had it barricaded. So once they saw 
me coming in full of soot and everything, they opened 
the gate for me and let me in, and then I hobbled down 
here and I was advised I had to get to the hospital, 
and I did. By then I had noticed I had a lot of beeps 
and a lot of phone calls because people found out, I 
guess, that I was all right from the World Trade. 

When I got to the hospital, everything was 
fine. They diagnosed me, told me I had actually tore a 
hamstring. But they had looked at it and they said, 
you know what? It's not that bad. In light of what 
was going on, I figured the same thing. So I returned 
back to work. I didn't stay out at all because I knew 
there were a lot more people that were worse off than 
myself . 

So I came back to work, and by the time I got 
back there, I noticed both of my partners who were on 
vacation came in because they called in and they told 
them I was lost at the World Trade. One came from Long 
Island and one came from Bay Ridge and they both came 



13 
R. HARRIS 



in and worked. They were sitting at the bridge in 
hopes that they saw me coming over the bridge, I 
guess . 

I guess the biggest thing that I noticed was 
the lack of knowing what was going on, because I don't 
know what you could say would be worse, to actually 
stand there and see this? The first thing came in my 
mind was the movie Armageddon, and this was reality, 
with the black smoke 30 floors high, debris falling 
everywhere. Being on this side, not knowing what was 
going on that side, because there were people, when I 
was coming back over the bridge, going on motorcycles 
walking, people coming back this way trying to go to 
Manhattan, and I'm thinking to myself they must be 
crazy. But then there were people here that were more 
stressed because they couldn't get on the other side of 
the bridge. 

So I didn't feel bad knowing that I had made 
it. A lot of people had guilt that I spoke to 
afterwards or they were just so devastated. Because I 
have never seen anything like that in 21 years of 
emergency work. But like I said, the biggest thing was 
to know that certain people had made it out, because 
everybody didn't have to make it, and that we were able 



14 
R. HARRIS 



to just stand up and go through all of this and still 
come back the next day. So I guess the biggest thing I 
learned was, not the salaries, not the titles, because 
there were no bosses anymore at the scene. We were 
very chaotic and I guess from M training and just love 
of humanitarianship, which we all have, we all were 
able to bring together and make it through. 

Q. Anything else you want to say, Russ? 

A. No. 

Q. I guess you said it all. 

A. Other than I'm just happy I'm here and the 
first thing I did was let the kids know I was all 
right. I was worried about debriefing everybody here, 
EMS and the Fire Department and the police, and we 
subsequently had a debriefing set up a few weeks later 
up at Cumberland Clinic. 

Q. Thanks, Russ. 

A. Thank you. 

MR. TAMBASCO: This interview will conclude 
at 1443 hours. If it wasn't mentioned, it was begun at 
1423 hours . 



File No. 9110024 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMT SORAYA ' DONNELL 
Interview Date: October 10, 2001 



Transcribed by Elizabeth F. Santamaria 



SORAYA O'DONNELL 
LIEUTENANT FEILER: Today's date is 

October 10, 2001. The time now is 808 hours 

and this is Lieutenant Monte Feller of the 

New York City Fire Department Investigations 

and Trials. I am conducting an interview 

with the following individual. 

Q. Please state your name, rank and 
assignment . 

A. EMT Soraya O'Donnell. 

Q. Of the New York City Fire Department. We 
are conducting the interview of Battalion 52 in 
Flushing regarding the events of September 11, 2001. 

Also for the record, can you please 
state your name. 

MR. QUEVEDO: Investigator Quevedo of 

the Bureau of Investigations and Trials. 

Q. Basically what we need you to do is just 
give us a scenario of the events on the morning of 
September 11, as it relates to the World Trade 
Center incident. 

A. I come in at 9:00 o'clock. I was on my 
way in. I was driving up to the battalion. My 
partner ran to my car and told me that the World 
Trade Center was hit by a plane and I parked the car 



SORAYA O'DONNELL 
and then he told me that tour 1, who was sitting at 
the garage, got the job. So I ran upstairs. I got 
my equipment and we usually take their late job. We 
jumped on and we went 63. We never logged off tour 
one, because they were already 63. So you can't log 
off. So we went as tour 1. We called -- we tried 
to call RCC Queens to let them know where we were 
from, but it was too busy. 

So we called to let the lieutenant know that we 
were tour 2 going to the World Trade Center. 

Q. Who was your partner that day? 

A. Richard Erdy. 

Q. Did you know who the EMT ' s were that you 
were -- 

A. That we took the job for? It was Rebecca 
Bird and Brian Harin. He is a new guy. 

Q. Do you know if they responded to the call? 

A. No, they didn't. They went home. 

Q. You said that you called. How did you 
call? 

A. We called on the cell phone. We called 
RCC and we called the Queens dispatcher while we 
were 63. The dispatcher told us to respond to -- to 
go to citywide. She told us to respond to the 



SORAYA O'DONNELL 
59th Street bridge and once we were there she would 
tell us where to go. So I took the LIE. There was 
a lot of traffic. I took the Grand Central to the 
last exit, got off at 21st Street, took that to the 
59th Street bridge. I told the dispatcher I was 
there. From there I could see already the smoke and 
traffic was beginning to build up. She told me to 
respond to Vesey and West. 

So I took the FDR drive. I was still in a 
little bit of traffic. You know, it was sporadic. 
Like sometimes there would be traffic and then the 
cops would have something closed and then it would 
move. It was just like a caravan of ambulances in 
front of me and in back of me there was a whole 
bunch of ambulances. 

I got off, I just followed them all the way 
there. I don't really know where I was, but then 
again we came to a stop. We were like a few blocks 
away from the World Trade Center. We came to a stop 
and it was slowing down, the caravan. Then I heard 
on the radio someone say there is a fireman down, 
there is a fireman down on this and this street and 
I'm looking around to see where I am and I see a 
fireman turn the corner and he's waving his hands. 



SORAYA O'DONNELL 
So I look behind me. There is buses behind me, 
there is buses in front of me that could easily get 
to him, but they're not moving so I started like 
maneuvering myself and made kind of like a, what do 
you call it? A K-turn. And I went over there. We 
took out the stretcher and they had a fireman, they 
was doing CPR. 

Q. Do you know where you were at that time, 
the street location? 

A. I think I was on West Street, a few 
blocks -- I was heading north, you know, as you come 
off the FDR drive, the tunnel. So I think I was 
heading north and I was a couple of blocks south of 
the — 

Q. Both buildings were still standing at that 
time? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Had both buildings been hit at that time? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Did you see the airplanes hit the 
buildings? 

A. No, no. When I left the battalion, when I 
was 63, we heard someone say over the radio, we 
heard a bomb went off in the other building. We're 



SORAYA O'DONNELL 
not sure if it's a bomb and they were trying to 
confirm it's another building -- it's another 
airplane . 

Q. Do you know approximately what time you 
arrived at that location where you met up with the 
firefighter? 

A. No. But in my unit history I went 82 to 
the hospital at 1001, I believe, and that was 
because the KDT was backing up also. Nothing was 
going through. So I remember I kept hitting the 
button, hitting the button on the way to the 
hospital. Anyway, so we went and they were doing 
CPR on the fireman. We put the long board and 
everything on the stretcher. We went over there and 
we continued to do CPR. We put him on the bus. 
Dr. Kelly was there. She came over and a paramedic 
came over. I don't know who he was. 

Q. EMS? The Fire Department? 

A. The paramedic? I don't know. 

Q. Do you know who he is? 

A. No. 

Q. Okay. 

A. They tried to intubate him. They couldn't 
get a tube in. So they left because they saw really 



7 
SORAYA O'DONNELL 

he wasn't gonna be viable, and we transported him to 

the hospital with two of the firemen from his 

company. 

Q. Which hospital did you go to? 

A. We went to Bellevue. I asked P.D. for an 
escort and a highway and a motorcycle cop gave me an 
escort to the hospital. 

Q. The firefighter that you did CPR on, do 
you know his name? 

A. Yes. 

Q. What was his name? 

A. Brian Suhr. Was it Brian? Engine Company 
216 from Brooklyn. 

Q. The firefighters that accompanied you, 
were they from the same -- 

A. I don't remember their names. The other 
one I don't know. 

Q. Okay. 

A. Anyway, we went to Bellevue. Once I got 
to Bellevue we took him out and they told me you 
gotta move the bus. You can't leave it there. And 
I had a lot of BBP in the back. So I said, where do 
I go? So I said, let me go to the battalion, to 
Bellevue station to clean up. 



SORAYA O'DONNELL 

I went over there, I grabbed a few of the 
things that belonged to the firemen. I brought it 
to the hospital, to the Emergency Room. I told one 
of the maintenance guys at Bellevue what I needed 
and I gave my partner the ACR. 

I went back, I started cleaning up. The 
maintenance guy was helping me clean up. He cleaned 
up the ambulance and I restocked. I went back to 
meet up with my partner and he couldn't get any 
information from the firemen, because they were 
refusing to give us any name or anything, because 
they didn't want the media to get a hold of 
anything. Which we understood. So we said fine. 

We finished the paperwork, we went back into 
the ambulance. While we were finishing up, 
restocking, a -- I think it was an EMT nun asked if 
she could come back with us . She wanted to 
volunteer. We said okay. Another doctor from the 
ER wanted to come also. He was a paramedic and a PA 
student . 

Q. The EMT? She worked for the Fire 
Department? 

A. No. She worked for Bellevue. 

Q. As an EMT? 



SORAYA O'DONNELL 

A. No. It was a nun. She was a nun. 

Q. Oh, a nun. I'm sorry. I thought you said 
EMT. 

A. A nun. So they came in the back with us. 
We went back to the World Trade Center. We told the 
dispatcher we were out of Bellevue, where does she 
want us . I forget what she told us . I think it was 
Battery Park she wanted us to go to, triage. 

When we were heading there my partner said, 
"Someone told me that one of the towers collapsed." 
I'm like "Yeah, yeah." We were like it's a joke. 
There were probably people exaggerating. So what 
happened was we were heading back and we see just a 
cloud of smoke. We don't see the towers anymore. 

Q. How did you head back there? 

A. We took the same way, the FDR drive. 

Q. Southbound? 

A. Yes. And we didn't see the towers. So 
that's when we realized that the towers had 
collapsed. 

Q. Both of them? 

A. Both of them. It was just a lot of smoke. 
And we kept hearing transmissions on the radio. You 
know, stuff that was going on. People saying they 



10 
SORAYA O'DONNELL 

were trapped. We headed back. When we got back 

there it was a whole totally different scene. We 

didn't see people around like we did before. We 

couldn't find any ambulances. We were just driving 

around. Of course we couldn't believe what was 

going on. We drove around for a little while. We 

saw an EMT, one of our guys, coming out of this 

cloud of smoke. He was holding his EMT bag and 

helmet. We asked him, "Where is your partner?" He 

goes, "I left him. I'm looking for my father. He 

was in the World Trade Center." 

Q. Do you know his name? 

A. And he had been crying. No, we didn't get 
anything. So we said, "well, why don't you get in 
the back with us?" We had a nun in the back. We 
figured she could talk to him. 

Q. Right. 

A. He got in the back. We went around -- I 
don't know. I think it was Battery Park, by the 
water. They were ferrying everyone away. We pulled 
over over there, because we saw a lot of buses and 
we said, let's go see if that's where we are 
supposed to be, what's going on. 

We went over there and I think there was only 



11 

SORAYA O'DONNELL 
one more unit there. 

Q. Do you know which unit that was? 

A. No. 

Q. Fire Department? 

A. It was volunteer. It was a volunteer. 
They said that nothing was going on. They were just 
ferrying people. So when we went back to the 
ambulance the kid was gone. The EMT left. So we 
didn't know where he went, we didn't get a name, 
nothing . 

Q. When you say you were at Battery Park, 
that was south of the Battery Tunnel where the fort 
is or where Marine Company 1 is? 

A. Do you have a map? 

Q. Yes, I do. If you can just mark the first 
time you arrived where you were and the second time. 

A. I think -- I don't know. I can't. This 
looks confusing to me. Which is the north tower? 

Q. This would be north. Here is the West 
Side Highway, here is West Street and here are the 
towers . 

A. I think it was somewhere around here. 

Q. At Battery Park City? 

A. Yes. 



12 
SORAYA O'DONNELL 

Q. By the buildings? 

A. No, it wasn't here. I don't know. I'm 
not gonna say. Then we drove around a little more 
and we found a fireman who was hurt. His eyes were 
bloodshot. We irrigated him. He wanted to go back 
but he couldn't see, so we took him back to 
Bellevue . 

Q. Do you know his name? 

A. No, I don't know it, but I got it. He 
gave us his name. We got an ACR. 

Q. Do you know what company he was it from? 

A. No, no. We took him to Bellevue, we came 
back . 

Q. You were able to get through to the 
dispatcher? 

A. I couldn't get any signals, no and the 
radio was so busy I couldn't tell her anything. So 
I just came and went. 

Q. What frequency were you on at that time? 

A. Manhattan south. 

Q. You were told to switch over to south? 

A. We were told to switch over. Only certain 
people were allowed to stay on citywide. Then we 
came back. The same thing. We couldn't find 



13 
SORAYA O'DONNELL 

anyone. We told the dispatcher we just came out of 

Bellevue. She told us to go to, I don't know, I 

think it was Chelsea Piers. But we were already 

here. So as we didn't know, I didn't know how to 

get to Chelsea Piers so I kept asking all the cops 

and they didn't know. 

Then I ran into an off-duty EMT or paramedic 
and he told me, "They're setting up a triage center 
at the Staten Island Ferry." So I said, "Okay." 
No, no. Before I even ran into him there was an old 
man leaning against a fence having difficulty 
breathing. We pulled over, we put him on the 
stretcher and his wife and we gave them oxygen. 
That's when I ran into the guy. So we headed over 
there to bring the old couple over there. 

Q. The person that directed you to the Staten 
Island Ferry, do you know who that was? 

A. A paramedic. 

Q. Do you know from what agency? 

A. No, no. I know he worked for the Fire 
Department . 

Q. The Fire Department? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Did he come with you to the Staten Island 



14 
SORAYA O'DONNELL 

Ferry? 

A. No, but I saw him later. Later on I saw 
him there. This is the name of the other fireman. 
We gave it to the hospital. 

Q. Can you just read it? 

A. Tony Sansobino. 

Q. And he came with the firefighter who was 
in arrest? 

A. Yes -- To the hospital. 

Q. Did you bring him back to the scene or 
they stayed at the scene? 

A. They stayed at the hospital. 

Q. They stayed at the hospital? 

A. Yes. 

Q. About what time was that, do you think? 

A. Around 11:30. We went back. So then I 
found the Staten Island Ferry and there was a 

Lieutenant there. My partner knows his name. I 
forgot. Anyway, he told us, park the vehicle here, 
grab your 02 and all your water and bring it 
upstairs. Upstairs they were setting the up the 
triage. We helped out with the triage. We were 
just basically waiting, waiting for patients to 
come. No one was coming. We were getting antsy and 



15 
SORAYA O'DONNELL 

we said, "Do we go outside and pick up patients?" 

They said, "No. You gotta stay here." So we just 

waited. We tried to call our families while we were 

over there. 

I don't know about what time Chief Brown, Bobby 
Brown, came in and he had been underneath the 
rubble. He came in. He was all dirty. He used to 
be our Captain here. So I'm looking at him and I 
said, "oh, my God. That's Bobby Brown. Oh, my 
God." So I went over to him and his eyes, we 
irrigated his eyes. We gave him 0-2, we took his 
vitals and he needed to go to the hospital. So 
someone asked him what hospital. He said Peninsula 
General, that's where his wife works. So my partner 
and I took him to the hospital. 

Q. Who was the supervisor at that triage? 
You don't know? Male? Female? 

A. I don't even know. There were a couple of 
supervisors there. 

Q. When you left and when you were turning 
back to the scene after somebody told that you the 
building had collapsed, both buildings had collapsed 
at that time? 

A. Both buildings had collapsed. 



16 
SORAYA O'DONNELL 

Q. But you didn't see them collapse? 

A. No, no. I just saw a lot of smoke. 

Q. Do you know what time that was about? 

A. No. 

Q. Did you ever enter any of the buildings? 

A. No. 

Q. You never had an opportunity to go in? 

A. No. 

Q. Was there anybody else that you saw that 
you recognized that you could name? The EMS people? 
The Fire Department people? 

A. I saw -- his name will come. He works for 
St. John -- he works for the privates -- St. John's, 
and he was working for St. Vinny's. What's his 
name? I saw him when I was driving around and we 
didn't know where to go. We looked at the 
ambulances and I saw that ambulance. So we pulled 
up next to each other and we said, "Where is 
everybody?" And they said, "we don't know." 

Q. St. Vincent's ambulance? 

A. St. Vinny's ambulance. 

Q. Do you remember the unit number? 

A. His name will come back. I'll take my 
time. Anyway. 



17 
SORAYA O'DONNELL 

Q. Okay. 

A. So he was in the same place where I was. 
He didn't know where everybody was. So we took 
Bobby Brown to Peninsula General in Rockaway. My 
partner came with me and another girl that I thought 
was his aide, but she wasn't. She is from Division 
4. She's in sick, limited. She came with us. I 
think she just wanted a ride back to Queens or 
something . 

Q. She wasn't injured? 

A. She wasn't injured. 

Q. Your partner, what is his name? 

A. Richard Erdy. 

Q. He stayed with you the entire time? 

A. Yes. 

You never separated? 

A. We separated at Bellevue when we brought 
in the firefighter and I went to BBP. 

Q. Other than that — 

A. That was the only time. 

Q. Is there anything else that you think is 
important? 

A. Yes. The fireman that was in cardiac 
arrest, we were trying to find out who he was, 



18 
SORAYA O'DONNELL 

because we felt like, wow, If we didn't get flagged 

for this guy, we would have been there when they 

collapsed. So we kept reading articles and found 

the reason he went into cardiac arrest was because a 

body landed on him. His Engine Company pulled 

him -- they were doing construction on the building, 

they pulled him over the scaffolding. So that's 

where we found him. We found his name, we found 

where he was from. My partner spoke to another 

fireman who knows. We found out the company he was 

from. We called the company and we went over there 

one day, the second Thursday after the World Trade 

Center and we spoke to one of the guys that came to 

the hospital with us and he told us basically what 

happened. That when we left to go to the hospital 

we closed the doors and we left and that's when the 

building came down. 

The other two guys that stayed from his company 

thought that the ambulance got crushed. So they 

thought that the three guys were dead basically and 

we were dead. Because they said as soon as we took 

off the building came down. When we got to the 

hospital and they were there for a while, that's 

when they found out the towers collapsed. They 



19 
SORAYA O'DONNELL 

thought that the two guys they left were dead, 

because they left them there. They were on their 

way back to the building. 

So they ended up meeting up and they couldn't 
believe each other were alive. The other two guys 
that we left at the scene said that they went back 
to get their equipment so they could go back into 
the building. That's when the towers collapsed. 
They went back underneath the scaffolding and they 
ran into the building. 

Q. This is the first building that collapsed 
or the second? Do you know? 

A. The first building. 

Q. So you were right at the perimeter of the 
building? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Do you know whether you were northeast, 
south or West? 

A. I have no idea. I think I was north. 

Q. Where was the firefighter exactly? 

A. What do you mean? 

Q. Where did you find him? 

A. We found him -- this is the corner. I 
think I was on West Street and he turned the corner. 



20 
SORAYA O'DONNELL 

I saw him, I made a maneuver, I came -- so it was on 

West Street. And there was a Church and there was 

like a scaffolding here. That's where we put him on 

the stretcher and everything. And that's it. 

Q. Anything else? 

A. That's it. And we couldn't transmit. The 
radios were so busy. We couldn't give signals and 
we couldn't give -- the KDT was down. 

In our log, in our history, we couldn't get 
anything . 

Q. You were originally on Queens east? 

A. Yes. 

Q. When you were asked to switch over to -- 

A. Citywide. 

Q. And then — 

A. And then Manhattan south I think it was 
they sent us to. North -- I think it was south. 

LIEUTENANT FEILER: We will conclude the 

interview and I want to thank you for your 

time helping us with this endeavor and it is 

now 8:28 a.m. and this will conclude the 

interview. 



File No. 9110025 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
RICHARD ERDEY 
Interview Date: October 10, 2001 



Transcribed by Nancy Francis 



R. ERDEY 

LIEUTENANT FEILER: Today's date is October 
10th, 2001. The time now is 0835 hours. This is 
Lieutenant Monty Feiler of the Fire Department of the 
City of New York, Investigations and Trials. I'm 
conducting an interview with the following individual: 

Q. Please state your name, rank and command. 

A. Richard L. Erdey, EMTD, Shield No. 1569. 

Q. Of the New York City Fire Department, 
Battalion 52, regarding the events of September 11th, 
2001. Also present is: 

MS. QUEVEDO: Investigator Fabiola Quevedo of 
the Bureau of Investigations and Trials. 

Q. What I need you to do, sir, is just give me a 
scenario of how you first became involved in the events 
of September 11th, where you were and how you 
responded. 

A. I was standing there at the battalion and 
they were calling a series of people to the job. The 
night tour was about to get off. They called 52 Boy. 
So I said, if Soraya don't come here in one minute, you 
guys are going out today, and this was only when the 
first tower was hit. I said you'll spend at least 24 
hours there easy, so that's a few hundred dollars, no 
problem. 



R. ERDEY 

So Solano pulled up. I said the World Trade 
Center was hit by a plane. She jumped in, got 
everything real quick, jumped in the vehicle and we 
went . 

Q. Did you partner with Solano? 

A. No, no. 

Q. And the two people that you relieved, do you 
know their names? 

A. Rebecca Bird and Jim Horan. 

Q. Did they respond, as far as you know? 

A. No. 

Q. You were driving or teching? 

A. Teching. 

Q. How did you get there? 

A. By ambulance No. 377. 

Q. What route did you take? 

Q. About what time was this? 
A. 8:59. 

Q. So the first plane had just hit? 
A. Yes. 

Q. When you were originally assigned to the 
call, was this on -- which frequency was it? 



R. ERDEY 

A. Queens 2 . 

Q. That's east? 

A. Queens east. 

Q. Did they give you any direction? 

A. No. 

Q. They just told you to go down to the World 
Trade Center? 

A. That's right. 

Q. You don't recall what route you took? 

A. No, I don't. 

Q. When you were entering Manhattan, did you see 
the skyline? 

A. Yes. 

Q. What did you see? 

A. We saw the Twin Towers. I couldn't tell both 
towers were hit because the way the wind was blowing. 
But as we got closer, I saw both towers were hit and I 
said this is definitely no accident. But I didn't know 
another plane hit the other tower. 

Q. You saw both buildings were still standing at 
that time? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Do you remember, were you still in Queens or 
in Manhattan when you saw that? 



R. ERDEY 

A. No. 

Q. Then what happened? 

A. We continued to drive down there. There was 
a New York Presbyterian bus in front of us. As we were 
going down there, he came out a few times because it 
was stop-and-go traffic because the other two lanes 
were blocked with civilian cars. So we were discussing 
the best route to go to. I memorized his number, this 
way I'd know who he was. 

Q. Which was that? 

A. Right now I don't have it in my head. I 
tried to sweep most of the stuff away. 

Q. Okay. 

A. We rode down there. Then I had the idea, 
because I see cars were trying to jump in between us, 
so I got on the PA and I told people stay in your lane, 
this is for emergency vehicles only, because nobody 
else seemed to be doing that. Everybody was headed 
towards one focus . 

Q. Were you on a highway at that point? 

A. We definitely were on a highway. 

Q. You were still on the Queens frequency? 

A. No. I think it changed to Citywide. I don't 
know when they told us to change to Manhattan south, 



R. ERDEY 

but we were on Citywide. 

Q. How long do you think it took you to get down 
to the World Trade Center? 

A. No concept of time. 

Q. When you arrived down at the general 
vicinity, do you know where you stopped initially, what 
street you were at or proximity to the buildings? 

A. I was told by Engine 216 we were at the 
tower . 

Q. Tower 1 or Tower 2? The south tower or the 
north tower? 

A. I believe the first tower that fell because 
they said that we were one minute away when the tower 
fell. 

Q. Okay. 

A. Wherever Daniel Suhr was hit by that body, 
that's where we were. 

Q. Who was that? 

A. That was the fireman from Engine 216, 
probably the first casualty, the first known casualty, 
because Dr. Kelly was in that ambulance and a medic was 
in the ambulance with us . 

Q. Do you know who the medic was? 

A. I have no idea. 



R. ERDEY 

Q. On-duty FDNY medic or -- 

A. I have no idea. 

Q. How did you come into contact with that 
firefighter? Do you remember the events surrounding 
that? 

A. I'm sitting there and I was amazed with this 
vehicle that was half there and half disintegrated and, 
you know, you're in amazement. I didn't see the body 
parts. Somehow my mind blocked that out. But my 
partner said she saw body parts. So we hear over the 
air that a fireman is in cardiac arrest. You hear it. 
You don't know where. I'm not a big traveler in 
Manhattan. So I looked around and I'm not seeing a 
fireman in arrest. So I ran around -- and you've got 
to understand now, even though it's sunny, there's 
black at the bottom. So I had no clue we were at the 
tower . 

So this fireman turns around, yo, yo, and 
he's waving. The ambulance behind us could have pulled 
out and went over to him. I guess they're so intent on 
going straight. So I had to back up, go over, go up 
and over the divide. Then we got to this yellow 
barrier. I said go through. She went through. We 
went under the scaffolding. So whatever tower had 



R. ERDEY 

scaffolding, unless both of them did. 

This photographer is there. I'll tell you 
one photographer probably didn't make it because that 
one definitely would have made the news because he was 
right in the guy's face. Firemen are very quick to not 
let you treat, just run. So they're running ahead of 
us with us going, and we finally get in the ambulance 
and we're doing all that we can. Dr. Kelly came in, 
who I didn't know it was Dr. Kelly at the time, but I 
knew she was from BHS . She looked familiar. But I'm 
not going to say, hey, you look familiar, not at a time 
like that. A medic walked in, so I just did 
compressions. They were trying to get an airway. All 
of a sudden they looked at each other, couldn't get an 
airway, and she said transport. 

Now, I know the way they looked at each other 
he wasn't going to make it. He didn't make it. He's 
dead. His neck was snapped. Anybody hit with a body 
from 70 stories up. So you're not going to tell a 
bunch of firemen, this guy is dead, we're not 
transporting him. So we transported him. 

Q. Did anybody accompany you? 

A. Two firemen. 

Q. Do you know who they were, their names or 



R. ERDEY 

what company? 

A. No. Solano wrote one name down. They're 
both from Engine 216. 

Q. Okay. 

A. They kept yelling, Danny, Danny, Danny. I 
said suction. I think it was brains coming out of his 
nose I'm pretty sure. You could tell his neck was 
snapped because every time you hit a bump, a head don't 
have that type of movement. 

Q. Right. 

A. So the kid was staring at us. Now, I know 
from watching my father die and even during -- my 
father died right after I got this job, the day after I 
got the job. Images burn in my head. Sometimes they 
play with my head. So the way they were staring into 
him, I said, look. I'm saying should I tell them? 
Should I not tell them? How can I tell them 
tactfully? So I said, look, we're doing the CPR for 
that small glimmer of hope, but I'll tell you what 
they're going to do. They're going to call it at the 
hospital. Please stop staring at him. You're going to 
burn this image in your head. I want you to remember a 
better image. At first they didn't want to believe -- 
not that they argued, but you could tell. 



10 
R. ERDEY 



Q. Right. 

A. Then they started saying he has a daughter of 
two. I just said continue CPR, continue suction. The 
other guy took over compressions for me. I mean, even 
though it was a short ride, it felt like the longest 
ride. We got to the hospital. A priest looked at me. 
I said give him last rights . They gave him last rights 
and they called it. 

Now, I told the firemen on the ride there 
that, if they happen to call it while they're still 
there, don't start staring, though it's tempting. 
You're going to burn that image in your head, too, and 
that's now how you want to remember Danny. So after he 
called last rights, I turned and I saw the two firemen 
standing there. I turned around and kind of pushed 
them out . 

Q. What hospital did you go to? 

A. I believe it's Bellevue. 

Q. What did you do after that? 

A. My partner had to take the truck because they 
didn't want any trucks there at triage. So now I was 
cut off from Solano. So I got the two firemen out of 
there. I wanted to make sure they were mentally okay 
because I don't know if they're going back or what's 



11 

R. ERDEY 



going on. Their brother just died. I know if my 
partner just died, I'd be mentally all whatever. 

Q. Right? 

A. So I made sure they got out of there and I 
said, doc, make sure that they don't -- because the 
dude was messed up. He got hit with a body. So I went 
back out, I walked around, reporters are shooting with 
their cameras, and I said to this Metro Care ambulance, 
you seen my partner, a little Hispanic girl? Oh, she 
left. I thought, oh, no. I thought they chased her 
out of the whole place. So I saw another FDNY 
ambulance, they brought people out, and I says, I think 
my partner left. I'm going with you guys because I 
want to go back in, there's more help to do. Just as I 
was waiting for them, my partner grabbed me. She was 
around the other side cleaning because the thing was 
full of blood now. We're not going to pick up more 
patients when we're full of blood and the suction is 
full and all. 

Q. Now, the EMTs that you ran into at that 
point, do you know who they were? Fire Department EMS? 

A. They were Fire Department EMS. 

Q. You went back to the scene after that? 

A. We went back. As we're driving up into the 



12 
R. ERDEY 



gray, I saw the black. Well, as we were driving back, 
I'm looking -- oh, let me bring it back. As we were 
there, whatever battalion is at Bellevue said you're 
taking a volunteer with you. I said I have no problem 
taking a volunteer. I just want you to know this could 
be their last ride. We're not going to go pussyfooting 
around. We're going back in. 

Because I already made a joke to my partner 
because I have military training, I was a peace officer 
for York College, and even though it was a rent-a-cop 
type of outfit, they had very highly -- police and 
other people, people at the Olympics where they had the 
bombing. They told us there's always secondary 
devices. When we were coming to this area, I said to 
my partner, we'll never feel it. The underground will 
blow up from us and we'll be dead. Because nobody's 
counting on a secondary device, and whatever bonehead 
had us lined up around the World Trade Center, after 
hindsight, 20/20, that ain't too bright either because 
there's usually a secondary device. The Olympics 
showed that in Atlanta. Most bombings show that. 
There's always something for the people and then, when 
everybody comes rushing in, there's a little something 
extra. But we didn't expect that the building was 



13 
R. ERDEY 



going to be the something extra. So I was realistic. 

So it happened to be the volunteer happened 
to be a nun, who was older, and I said to her, look. 
You understand, ma'am, we might not come back from 
this. Oh, I understand. I said, no, I'm serious. We 
could die. I said, and you're a volunteer. At least 
my wife gets a little cash, goes back to Brazil, makes 
a hundred grand because she now knows English. I said, 
but you've got to understand that there could be 
something lost. 

I don't know if we picked up another 
volunteer on the first time going in or the second time 
because we went in twice. It was a white dude, he was 
young, he could have had children but he said no, and I 
told him the same thing. Any volunteers I picked up, I 
told them this could be their last ride. Now, from 
that point we cleaned up, we went back, we took our 
volunteers . 

Q. Do you know their names? 

A. Nope. Names to me weren't important. I was 
just -- I call it the zone. When I'm doing work, it's 
the zone. If I had five patients, I'm in the zone for 
five patients. If you want to come behind me and take 
a potshot, you could very well do it, and most times 



14 



R. ERDEY 



you couldn't. I'm in the zone for those five patients 
and I do my work. So when I'm in the zone, too, all 
right, I'm going to pick up casualties, that's all I'm 
going to do. So there could be a hundred people on my 
bus, they could all be celebrities, that doesn't mean 
jack to me at that point. 

Q. When you returned back to the scene, where 
did you go? Where were you directed to? 

A. Well, you know, they were giving us 
direction, but it was so damn gray and dark and you had 
to ride over this and that and ride around this because 
cars stopped in the middle, and | 

So, you know, she did her best. I'm very 
honest with you. I mean, I look at this now, it's very 
big and nice. But those little maps, especially when 
it's bumpy, I don't even try and, you know, I'm full of 
amazement, like wow. In my mind, I'm dreaming and this 
didn't happen. 

So we rode down there and there was a big 
black area. I said, whatever you do, don't drive into 
the black area because if we get a flat tire we're 
useless to everyone. We could barely see where we are 
now. She agreed that was a smart move. So we rode as 
close as we can when things are gray but clear, and 



15 
R. ERDEY 



then out of the black comes this EMT from the Fire 
Department. I wish I knew his name because he's alive, 
and I remember his face, and there's only two EMTs that 
died. He came out with his orange helmet, eyes were 
red, and I said, dude, what are you doing here? I saw 
private ambulances. I didn't see a Fire Department 
ambulance. He said, I'm looking for my father. I 
said, where's your father? He said, in the World Trade 
Center . 

So I told him to get in the ambulance because 
he was still susceptible to orders. He wasn't in a 
denial/agitation stage. So I had him back there and I 
figured the nun -- I said to him there's a nun back 
here who's an EMT would talk to him. She talks to 
people for her life day in and day out. So our 
survivor is back there and we're picking up old people 
and stragglers, people that couldn't breathe, people 
that couldn't make it to the ferry. Because a block or 
two away was the ferry, and if you got to the ferry, 
you could see the water, sky blue and everything was 
beautiful. It was on the corner. I forgot which ferry 
it was. Solano would know. I got on the PA and I said 
-- because walking around was senseless because people 
had shields, you don't know who was a patient, who was 



16 
R. ERDEY 



a cop. I said, anybody that needs medical attention, 
come this way. 

Then I went to a grocery store and they 
opened the doors because the power was out and I said, 
I need water, because I had and old cup. I grabbed a 
jug of water and I said, I'm not buying it, I'm taking 
it. No, I understand. Because it was for a patient. 
It wasn't for me. So I gave her water. I came back in 
there and I said where 's the EMT? Gone. I was furious 
because now he went back in there. I wish I knew his 
name . 

Q. Do you know where he was from, what 
battalion? What was the status of the buildings at 
that point? 

A. They're gone. 

Q. Did you see them collapse? 

A. No. Somebody said a tower collapsed while we 
were cleaning up. I'm thinking, what's he talking 
about? On our ride back down there, I'm looking and I 
said, wow, it's really on fire now. I'm looking and I 
said, not for nothing, but I think the World Trade 
Center is down. I said, I'll tell you when I get up to 
the New York Telephone building. I looked again and I 
says it's down because my eyes watered up and I turned 



17 
R. ERDEY 



back to the window and I said, sister, if you look to 
your left, that's where the World Trade Center used to 
be, and she says you're kidding me. 

Q. Did it look like one had collapsed or both of 
them? 

A. They were both gone. Both of them. 

Q. Do you know what time about that was? 

A. We didn't even know that we were one minute 
from the tower collapsing if it wasn't for that engine 
company telling us . We went to the engine company to 
get closure, to 216. It's funny how people need 
closure. I especially need closure. We needed closure 
and we went down there and we brought flowers to Quinn, 
to them, and to 49 for Carlos, and one of the guys was 
there and he said, I recognize your voice. The other 
guy was there and he goes, you know, we talked about 
you guys for four days. So they talked about us and we 
talked about them. So we said, what happened? Well, 
he got hit with a body, which we already knew, and he 
said, he saved us. I spoke to Ken Fried, who was not 
there, but I was speaking to him on-line and I asked to 
make sure all my brothers who went to the Fire side 
were alive. I said I picked up the guy who got hit 
with the body, and he said, oh, that's Danny Suhr. So 



R. ERDEY 

that's how I found out his name. 

Q. Who is Ken? 

A. Ken Fried. He's a fireman. He was not there 
at that time, but he's on the Fire side. I had five or 
six people who I was partners with that went to be 
firemen . 

Q. Oh, okay. 

A. So I wanted to know if they all lived, so 
every time I saw a name on-line, are you there? You 
know, it could be their father or their mother. So 
that's how I found out the fireman's name. I also 
found out that Ken's father came from Engine 216, so 
that's how they knew the fireman. He told us that he 
didn't save just you, he saved the battalion, that fire 
engine company. I was like wow. So when we went down 
there, that same day the picture of him was in the 
Post. I said, that was him. They saw us, we spoke, we 
found out from Engine 216, from those two young guys, 
we were one minute away from, I believe that tower, and 
he saved that company because they all followed us, 
which I didn't know. The cop who escorted us knows. I 
don't know if you were there, but that was some caravan 
that was in the way. 

Before that you asked me about the New York 



19 



R. ERDEY 



Presbyterian ambulance and the number. I don't have 
the number. I have it written down at home. But I 
called up New York Presbyterian. I said tell me what 
happened to number so-and-so. I can't think of the 
number. They said, I can't tell you what happened to 
the people, because I asked what happened to the 
people. I told them who I was. I said, I'm EMT Erdey 
from the Fire Department. I was memorizing their 
number in case I met up with them. They came out to 
talk to us. Please tell me about those people. I 
can't tell you about those people. All right. So I 
said, then listen to what I'm saying. Don't tell me 
about the people; tell me about the ambulance itself. 
How is ambulance such-and-such number? It was three 
numbers. She said, I can't tell you about the people. 
I said, no, listen to what I'm saying. Tell me about 
the ambulance. She said the ambulance disintegrated. 



I saw a New York Presbyterian ambulance. Now I 
have to know about it. If you want the number, you 
leave me your number and I'll call you. Okay. But I 
said what happened to this number? Oh, well, those two 



20 
R. ERDEY 



people, one put on his helmet, crashed through the 
window, broke both his legs, and the other one ran over 
him to get inside. They both lived. I gave that dude 
my number to give to that dude who was driving because 
that's the dude that came out, and I said, please have 
that dude call me. Well, I never got a phone call from 
that dude. Otherwise I'd have the name for you. But 
those two guys lived. Those two guys you might want to 
speak to because both his legs got broke. He was there 
and stayed there. But he hasn't called me. 

I'm kind of pissed I didn't get that guy's 
name, who came out of that smoke. If there's one image 
that's burned through my head, it's Danny with his 
teeth loose and that kid coming out of the black smoke. 
Q. Is there anything else that you recall? 
A. No. 

LIEUTENANT FEILER: Okay. We'll conclude the 
interview. I want to thank you for the time and your 
participation in this event. It's really, really 
important. The time now is 0857 hours and we'll 
conclude the interview. 



File No. 9110026 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMT ERIC HANSEN 
Interview Date: October 10, 2002 



Transcribed by Elizabeth F. Santamaria 



Hansen 
LIEUTENANT FEILER: Today's date is 

October 10, 2001. The time now is 1013 

hours. I am Lieutenant Monte Feilerwith the 

New York City Fire Department Investigations 

and Trials. I am conducting an interview 

with the following individual: 

Q. Please state your name, rank and command. 

A. My name is Eric K. Hansen, badge number 
1258 at 22 Battalion, Fifth Division. 

Q. EMT? 

A. EMT. 

Q. We're conducting the interview at 
interview room A at the Bureau of Investigations and 
Trials, 9 Metrotech, New York, Brooklyn. 
What I need from you, sir, is a 
scenario of what occurred on the morning of 
September 1 1th in response to the World Trade Center 
incident. 

A. Approximately 8:50, 8:55 I was ordered by 
Captain Olsen of the 22 Battalion to respond with 
LSU5, which I normally drive, to World Trade Center 
Tower 1 due to a plane crash accident. I got onto 
the Verrazano, went into the Brooklyn Battery 
Tunnel, came out of the Brooklyn Battery Tunnel and 



Hansen 
I was on West Street, headed up towards Liberty. 
Upon there, I saw Chief McCracken of the department 
running southwards and I saw the Fire Commissioner 
also running southwards. I saw Chief Gombo 
directing me to go down a block towards Barclay 
Street, because there was debris coming down at that 
time. This was approximately 9:15 or so, a.m. 

I proceeded down towards Barclay Street due to 
the fact Chief Gombo stated there was debris falling 
out of the windows. It wasn't debris. It was 
bodies coming down, being pushed out - coming out 
of the World Trade Center Tower 1 . At that time, I 
proceeded down towards Barclay Street. There was a 
traffic tie-up at Barclay Street. I was then 
directed by police to move my LSU5 out of the way of 
traffic and to move down towards Murray Street. 

I proceeded down, I turned left onto Murray 
Street to where I stayed there until I got further 
orders from another EMS or Fire Department 
personnel. I stayed down there on Murray Street and 
I was directed to go down towards North End Avenue. 
I was on the corner of Murray Street and North End 
Avenue where I parked my rig. At that time, I heard 
what had sounded like a train, a freight train 



Hansen 
coming through the streets, and it was one of the 
building caving down. 

At that time, I did not know there was a second 
plain that hit the second World Trade Center. I was 
really confused at the sound and the situation until 
I saw the blevy of dust and smoke coming towards - 
up the street and I stayed in the ambulance where I 
saw Chief Fran Pascale, Chief Fran Pascale asked me 
to direct all the ambulances out of the area and to 
move up towards some place like Warren Street. 

Q. Where were you at that time when you saw 
Chief Pascale? 

A. I saw Chief Pascale at north - excuse me. 
I saw Chief Pascale at North End Avenue and she 
was - everybody was running for their lives 
literally. I left my ambulance parked at the corner 
of Murray and North End Avenue and I directed all 
the ambulances to go down towards North End Avenue 
and Warren to where it would be a little more safer. 

We got here at Warren Street to where - I 
couldn't find Chief Pascale and I couldn't find the 
people. There was an ambulance backup because we 
just couldn't get out of the area. Everything was 
tied down. 



Hansen 
At that time, there was a second freight train. 
It sounded like a second freight train running 
through the street. That was Tower 2 collapsing at 
that time. We were all down a one-way Street, I 
believe it was on Warren Street, and we ducked both 
into lobbies of buildings to protect ourselves from 
the second wave of smoke and dust and gases that 
were coming out of the World Trade Center. At that 
time, there was speculations that the World Trade 
Center had collapsed, but still over the radio 
communications was very mixed up. Nobody knew where 
they were going. I wound up at River Terrace, which 
was right off of Warren Street and I was directed by 
Captain Abdo, he works in the Division, he just made 
captain. He used to work here, on the seventh floor. 

I was directed by Captain Abdo about a good 45 
minutes to an hour later, he stated that there was a 
possible chance of a gas main leak in the area. 
People started to scurry. I stayed and remained 
with the Captain until further orders that he gave 
me, assisting moving the traffic along. Captain 
Abdo, then I was directed by Captain Abdo to go to 
23rd Street and Chelsea Pier to where I made my way. 



Hansen 
It took some time to make my way. I made my way on 
down there. I was down there approximately 1 1 , 
1130. 

Q. You took the LSU truck with you? 

A. I took the LSU truck with me. It was 
covered with dust and debris and all that stuff. I 
took it down there to where doctors and nurses 
wanted the supplies from my LSU. I said, I cannot 
give them out until I had permission from the sector 
commander at that time. I had to wait a good hour 
until a sector commander gave me permission to 
offload all my equipment, except for the 
weapons-of-war kits, the atropine. The atropine, 
which did I not offload and I kept them on my rig 
until someone gave me off orders to offload that. 
Because I carry quite a few bags of those on the 
LSU. 

Q. What kind of equipment were you giving 
out? 

A. I was giving out backboards, I was giving 
out long boards, I was giving out regulators, 
splints, traction splints, water, saline. 
Everything that an ambulance carried, I carried: 
Suction, portable suctions. I gave out the 



Hansen 
multilaetor, two of them, and I set up the M tank 
for an asthma section. That they had already 
prepared by the pier, which I set up for them so 
they had an asthma table. 

I was told as soon as I finished there, I was 
directed to go to station 1 1 to pick up more 
equipment and supplies and to go to Bellevue and 
pick up more equipment and supplies and to bring it 
down to 23rd Street, Chelsea Pier. 

Q. When you originally received the call, 
what frequency did you get it on? 

A. I was told by my Captain go to Richmond 
frequency. I stayed on Richmond frequency until I 
got onto - because I was not told by Richmond 
frequency to switch over to citywide, stay on 
Richmond frequency. 

Q. Who directed you? Which Captain at the 
battalion? 

A. Captain Olsen. I stayed on the Richmond 
frequency until I hit Vesey Street, Vesey Street and 
West Street, and I had to call up Richmond and they 
turned around and said, "your location that you're 
supposed to be at" - this was about 9:30. I stayed 
there until I was ordered by Chief - this is after 



8 
Hansen 

Chief Gombo. I just wanted to find out where my new 

dropoff zone was supposed to be set up. 

Q. When you were coming over the Verrazano 
Bridge, you were by yourself? 

A. Yes. I'm a single-man unit. 

Q. What did you see? 

A. I saw - the only thing I saw was World 
Trade Center 1 with smoke coming out of the top of 
the tower. 

Q. Was that the south building or the north 
building? 

A. I have no idea which one it was. I 
believe it was the north building first. 

Q. So when you were coming over the bridge 
one building was struck? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Not the second? 

A. No, sir. 

Q. Were you present when the second building 
was struck? 

A. Definitely. 

Q. Did you see the plane hit it? 

A. No, sir, I couldn't, because I was down at 
Ground Zero, which is now Ground Zero, getting 



Hansen 
directions where to drop off my supplies. My 
supplies, - I was getting directions to move 
further on down, down to Barclay Street to where I 
was at that time was a shower of debris of human 
bodies coming down off the building. You. 

Q. You said you ran into Chief McCracken. 
Did you have a conversation with Chief McCracken? 

A. I did not have a conversation. I just saw 
him running south from where I was, off of Vesey 
Street, and west and I saw the Commissioner running 
south also, but they were on the Hudson Riverside 
of the street and they were running southwards when 
they turned around and said there was debris coming 
down from the buildings. 

Q. You're talking about Commissioner Von 
Essen? 

A. Von Essen. 

Q. You had a conversation with Chief Gombo? 

A. Chief Gombo, I said, "Chief, where do you 
want my LSU?" That's LSU5 from Staten Island. He 
turned around and said, "Get the rig and get it out 
of here. There is debris coming down." It was a 
quick - that was the extent of the conversation. 

Q. Did you have contact with other EMS or 



10 
Hansen 

firefighters? 

A. I had contact with some - it looked like 
it was a Battalion Chief who told me to take my rig 
and get it out of here, get it out of harm's way, 
because stuff is coming down. 

Q. Do you know who he was? 

A. No idea. No idea. 

Q. Then you got up to, I think you said 
Barclay? 

A. Yes. When I got up to Barclay, I was told 
to move down towards Murray Street. 

Q. Who told you that? 

A. Well, the Chief said, "Get it out of here 
and get it out of harm's way." The Battalion Chief 
that was standing there right at the engines, and I 
moved it up towards Murray Street and I was down at 
Murray and west and then I was told to move up to 
Murray and - Murray and North End Avenue. I parked 
it on the corner and like I said, at that time 
everything was calm until the freight train rumbled 
in the streets and it was still not knowing what 
really took place or what happened. 

Q. Did you ever enter any of the buildings? 

A. Never entered any of the buildings - any 



11 

Hansen 
of the World Trade Center proper, no. 

Q. Other than the chiefs that you mentioned, 
did you run across any other EMS people that you 
recognized? 

A. I ran across Valerie Longo of the 22 
Battalion, who had a rig out there. 

Q. Where did you see her? 

A. She was parked on Murray Street. 

Q. Murray and what? 

A. Murray and - between North End Avenue and 
West Side. 

Q. She was taking care of patients? 

A. No. They were standing by or parked on a 
45-degree angle as we were told to do. There were a 
whole bunch of ambulances from New Jersey, Hatzolah 
and a few other places. The Fire Department 
ambulances, they were parked at a 45-degree angle. 
I took my LSU knowing that if I had to get out 
and - to set up a triage area some place, I had to 
be ready to go at any moment. 

Q. Just for the record, can you just tell me 
what LSU stands for? 

A. Logistics support unit. And that handles 
supplies for mass casualty incident to a certain 



12 
Hansen 

number of people. 

Q. Did there come a time where you ever did 
switch over to citywide? 

A. There came a time when I switched over to 
Citywide after I spoke to Chief Abdo - I mean 
Captain Abdo of the 5th Division. 

Q. Any contact with any other EMS personnel? 

A. The only contact I had with other EMS 
personnel were from other boroughs and I did not 
know them at that time. 

Q. Any voluntaries? 

A. I saw voluntary ambulances, Jersey 
ambulances, and I saw Hatzolah ambulances down 
there, but I did not recognize anybody. 

Q. How about firefighters? Anybody you 
recognized? 

A. There was no firefighters that I did 
recognize, at all. I mean but there was fire 
companies down there. 

Q. So after you were directed to go up to 
Chelsea by Chief Pascale, you stayed at the Chelsea 
Pier area in the triage? 

A. Right. Until 8:30 that night. 

Q. Did you witness the buildings collapse or 



13 
Hansen 

you heard it? 

A. I did not witness the buildings collapse 
due to the fact that the other buildings were 
shadowing the structures from where I was. I was, 
you know, too close, too far in and right next to 
the buildings to where you couldn't see anything. 
But it was just a plume of smoke and dust and debris 
coming down. My LSU was covered with soot and 
debris. I had to clear that off and I stood there 
or my LSU stood, it bears marks, baptized under 
fire. 

Q. Was anybody with you? Did you pick up any 
personnel? 

A. I didn't pick up anybody at all. I just 
needed my orders to drop my supply load that I had 
in the back here or where to set up a triage area. 
When I got my orders to go down to 23rd Street, I 
was told to set up my triage area at 23rd Street. 

Q. By Chief Pascale? 

A. By Chief Pascale and Captain Abdo. 

Q. When you got to Chelsea Pier, who was in 
charge there from EMS? 

A. I could not recognize anybody from - I 
did not recognize anybody. Just because I probably 



14 
Hansen 

had - I don't know. I was stunned by the whole 

situation. Stunned or upset by the whole situation, 

but I know he was a EMS Captain that told me to drop 

off- 

Q. Male? Female? 

A. It was a male. He told me to drop off my 
supplies there and to help set up 23rd Street as a 
triage point area. 

Q. Did you have any further radio 
communications with anyone? 

A. The only time I had - my next radio 
communications were approximately around 
5:00 o'clock, when they were trying to take roll 
call of ambulances in the area. It might have been 
just a little earlier. I'm not quite sure. 

Q. Is there anything else that is important 
between the time frame that we were talking about 
that you would like to add? 

A. No, not at this time. But it was - I did 
dive into buildings and there was one doorman that 
was - a doorman that was going to lock the lobby or 
this door. I don't even know the building because 
it was like it happened and a Police Officer said, 
don't lock it, because other people were still 



15 
Hansen 

coming from the plume of debris and smoke and 

everybody made a mad dash. 

Q. That was before the buildings collapsed? 

A. No. This was on the second building that 
collapsed. The second collapse. I do not know what 
transpired. I did not know there was a second plane 
hit. I did not know with that bowl of thunder and 
the noise, I did not know that the World Trade 
Center caved in. I was totally unaware until 
someone said, the World Trade Center collapsed. It 
was too unbelievable to believe that such a thing 
could happen. 

Q. We are going to conclude the interview. I 
want to thank you for your time. Thank you for 
participating in this. It's very important. 

A. No problem. No problem. 

LIEUTENANT FEILER: We conclude the 

interview at 1034 hours. 



File No. 9110027 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMT JUSTIN LIM 
Interview Date: October 10,2001 



Transcribed by Elizabeth F. Santamaria 



Lim 
MR. ECCLESTON: Today is October 10, 

2001. The time is 8:57 a.m. hours. This is 

Christopher Eccleston of the New York City 

Fire Department. I am conducting an 

interview with the following individual: 

Q. Please state your name, rank and title and 
assigned command of the Fire Department of the City 
of New York regarding the events of September 1 1 , 
2001. 

A. Justin Lim, Shield 5016, EMT, Battalion 
20. 

Q. Justin, were you assigned to the World 
Trade Center disaster on September 1 1 , 2001 ? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Enroute to the alarm, can you tell me what 
you saw? 

A. Enroute to the alarm we saw both of the 
buildings giving up with a lot of smoke and we 
actually saw a little fire from the West Side 
Highway. 

Q. When you arrived on the scene, where did 
you park your ambulance? 

A. West and Vesey. 

Q. Can you indicate on the map with a number 



Lim 
1 where you parked your vehicle. 

A. (Complied with request.) 

Q. Whom did you first report to when you 
arrived there? 

A. At the time there was no officers, but 
there were two medics on scene, also from Battalion 
20, which told us that we were supposed to park our 
buses in the opposite direction of the World Trade 
Center in order for immediate egress. 

Q. Were you given a specific assignment by 
them after you turned your vehicles around? 

A. At the time we turned our vehicles around, 
we started to gather our equipment and we had 
treated actually several ESU and firefighters for 
minor injuries before we could actually make it to 
the Trade Center. 

Q. This was on Vesey and West where you 
treated them in? 

A. Yes. 

Q. After you treated these injured people, 
did you transport them anywhere? 

A. At the time they didn't really want to 
leave the scene and we just got a lot of the dust 
and dirt out of their eyes and we were trying to 



Lim 
evaluate them to see how serious their injuries were 
and at the time there wasn't any major injuries. It 
was just a lot of dust, minor abrasions, so we let 
them go on their way because they refused to be 
transported anywhere. 

Q. After they left you, what did you do next? 

A. We started gathering our equipment, which 
consisted of our helmet, our turn out coat and first 
aid bag, AED and oxygen bag. 

Q. And where did you respond? 

A. We started walking towards the World Trade 
Center and at that time that's when the collapse 
happened. 

Q. That's when the first building collapsed? 

A. Yes. 

Q. What did you do when the first building 
collapsed? 

A. When the first building collapsed, we both 
started - my partner and I both started walking 
back to the vehicle and we opened up one of the 
compartment doors where we put all our equipment in 
and as it was coming down, we started seeing a mob 
of people start running towards us. So we opened up 
our back doors and we put in as many people as we 



Lim 
could and then my partner was kind of motioning to 
the civilians and the ESU workers, that whoever 
wanted to get a ride, they just hop in and we would 
take them. 

And this whole time the building was still 
coming down. It was only halfway down. I proceeded 
to get into the driver's seat and there were like 
several people running up to the bus saying, "get 
out of here." And we actually ended up driving with 
several people on the hood and people were hanging 
off the sides of the mirrors, off the back step of 
the ambulance, and I'd say we probably got about 
like 30 - maybe 30 people out of there before it 
actually came completely down and the smoke came. 

Q. Where did you respond to when you had all 
these people? Where did you drive them to? 

A. We started going, I believe it was - I 
guess it was Barclay or Murray. One of those two 
block. It was just before that school or the 
college. At that time everybody got off and I guess 
a couple of privates and I believe two FDNY 
ambulances were there and I guess we started staging 
around that area. 

Q. Can you indicate on the map where you 



Lim 
believe the staging area was set up? 

A. Between Warren and Murray. 

Q. Between Warren and Murray on West? 

A. Yes. 

Q. You stayed there for how long? 

A. We stayed there probably the duration. 
What happened was there was no officers and I 
started taking down the people's units. There was 
like the Jewish hospitals, the private hospitals, a 
voluntary ambulance there, there was two city FDNY 
units in there. On a napkin I wrote down all their 
units and I gave it back to Manhattan South, telling 
them I had about ten units that were being staged. 
So that's pretty much where we were. 

Q. And you were at this location when the 
second tower came down also? 

A. Actually, when the second tower came down 
we were probably at Barclay and Murray and then we 
went to Warren and Murray. We dropped off people 
here before the second one came. Because that's 
when they started coming out and they wanted to go 
back and get their friend or whatever. 

Q. So you dropped off people at West and 
Barclay? 



Lim 

A. Yes, West and Barclay. 

Q. And then you proceeded to West and Murray? 

A. At this time we were going to try to turn 
around, I believe it was, and then when we started 
turning around the second building came down. So we 
then turned around, and that's how we ended up 
there. 

Q. So when the second building came down, 
you're indicating you were at Barclay and West? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Or West between Barclay and Vesey? 

A. Right. After that then we were treating 
some minor aided again. It was all debris and dirt 
and when the second building came down we, again, 
took as many people as we could and then we moved 
here. 

Q. You moved to Murray and West? 

A. Correct. 

Q. Correct? 

A. Correct. 

Q. Do you remember unit designations from 
these units that were with you or the names of 
people who were with you? 

A. I know that - 



8 
Lim 

Q. To the best of your memory. 

A. I know there was one guy from a Queens 
hospital. I was in the academy with him and he was 
there, I believe, with a voluntary ambulance. 

Q. Do you remember what his name was? 

A. I believe his name was James Mahoney. 

Q. James Mahoney? 

A. Yes. And then there was another Jewish 
hospitals there. I think Hatzolah I think it was 
and then there was another guy that had a gold 
shield on and he had - 

Q. The pais? The curls? 

A. Yeah, the curls and he was trying to 
direct everybody but, you know, but he was still 
caught in the chaos. He wasn't really doing much. 
He was yelling at everybody. So he started trying 
to take people on his own and transport people that 
haven't even been triaged. So he wasn't any help. 
And by that time, before they yelled for a gas leak 
for another evacuation, there were a few lieutenants 
there and they kind of gave direction, and there 
were staging areas all over the place. 

Q. How long do you believe you remained at 
Murray and West? 



Lim 

A. I'd probably say maybe 40 minutes. 
That's actually before - a couple of minutes before 
they started assigning the units to the Chelsea 
Pier. So we treated who we could and we asked 
everybody if they wanted to be transported and most 
of them said no, and then they reassigned us to 
Chelsea Pier. 

Q. So from Murray and West you responded to 
the Chelsea Pier; is that correct? 

A. They started assigning people there. We 
were kind of blocked in and then we - they said 
everybody started running towards us and then a few 
minutes later we heard there was a gas leak. So 
that's when they wanted us to evacuate. So at that 
time we took - I believe we took two firefighters 
and we went back to Chelsea Pier and we dropped them 
off half way, because they wanted to get out. 

Q. Do you have any idea approximately what 
time this was? 

A. No. 

Q. You can use the time line, I don't know if 
this will help had you at all. The north tower went 
down at 10:30, 10:29. 

A. (No response.) 



10 
Lim 

Q. Was it after 12? Was it before 12? Noon? 

A. It was probably around noonish. 

Q. Around noonish? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Do you have anything else you would like 
to add to this, to the events that happened prior to 
12:00 noon? 

A. As far as criticism? 

Q. Anything you want to tell me. Anything 
you saw, anything you heard, any emotions you felt, 
any feelings. 

A. In the beginning when we first staged by 
West and Vesey, I had a lot of firefighters that are 
friends from my department that walked over to the 
building about ten minutes before we started to and 
that was the time the building collapsed. They 
probably just got to the front door. We treated 
firefighters, lieutenants, captains. Actually the 
biggest downfall to this whole thing was probably 
the communications with the private hospitals, 
because some of them didn't have unit designations, 
just vehicle ID numbers. They had no clue what to 
do. ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^| 

Hthey 



11 

Lim 
basically didn't want to listen. Initially they 
didn't want to give information. You know, it took 
me a while to convince them, you know, we have to 
stage here, because there were a lot of wounded. We 
were actually trying to stage there and get them 
treating patients so that we could turn back and see 
if we could get anybody else. That's when they 
called the gas leak and everybody had to turn and 
run. 

Q. Anything else you would like to add? 

A. That's it. 

MR. ECCLESTON: This concludes our 

interview. The time is 9:09. I thank you 

very much for your corporation. The counter 

on the tape is 212. 



File No. 9110028 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
PARAMEDIC KEVIN KELLEHER 
Interview Date: October 10, 2001 



Transcribed by Elisabeth F. Nason 



2 
K. KELLEHER 



MR. ECCLESTON: Today's date is October 10, 
2001. The time is 833 hours. This is Christopher 
Eccleston of the New York City Fire Department. 
I'm conducting an interview with the following 
individual. 

Q. Please state your name, rank, title and 
assigned command of the Fire Department of the City of 
New York regarding the events of September 11, 2001. 

A. My name is Kevin Kelleher, paramedic, 
assigned to Battalion 20. 

MR. ECCLESTON: Also present in the room is 

PARAMEDIC MARQUEZ: Paramedic Felix Marquez, 

assigned to Battalion 20, shield number 1379. 

Q. Were you assigned to the World Trade Center 
disaster on September 1 1 , 2001 ? 

A. Yes, I was. 

Q. Responding to the call, can you tell me what 
you saw? 

A. I was responding down the Sheridan Expressway 
out of the Bronx. We were able to see smoke from both 
towers. We got on the FDR. As we are heading down the 
FDR, we started noticing people coming towards us. 
There was a - once we got south of the Manhattan 



3 
K. KELLEHER 



Bridge, we couldn't see any - we could only see one 
tower in the cloud of smoke. 

As we got to the end of the FDR, we tried to 
get to the west side. We got down to the tunnel at the 
end and three quarters of that had been closed down. 
We thought it had collapsed. So we turned around and 
tried heading east towards the World Trade Center. We 
responded to the staging area, it was supposed to be 
Church and Vesey. We were heading west on Maiden Lane, 
when over the air we started hearing people screaming 
that the second tower was coming down. 

At that time, everything just went black. We 
got covered in a cloud of dust and debris. We made a 
quick left-hand turn on Liberty and Trinity Place, I 
believe it is, right on Liberty south and left on 
Broadway. We started heading south on Broadway. We 
got flagged down at Exchange Place and Broadway, where 
a Police Lieutenant complaining of difficulty 
breathing. So we stopped the vehicle there and began 
treatment on him. 

Q. What were the extent of his injuries? 

A. He was complaining of shortness of breath 
basically. We had a physician and an EMT with us at 
the time. 



4 
K. KELLEHER 



Q. Who were the physician and the EMT, do you 
recall their names? 

A. The EMT was Juan Vega. I don't know who the 
physician was. I'm not really sure who the physician 
was. I know he was a pediatrician from Jacobi 
Hospital. 

Q. You brought him with you? 

A. Yes. 

Q. I didn't recall. Do you know the name of the 
EMT? 

A. The EMT is Juan Vega. 

Q. You picked up this police officer and then 
you proceeded where with him? 

A. We proceeded south on Broadway. We were 
trying to clear the area because we didn't know what 
else was in danger of coming down. We wanted to get to 
a safe area. We proceeded down Broadway to Staten 
Island Ferry Terminal at South Ferry. 

Q. When you got down there, what did you do? 

A. We got there, we were met by about a thousand 
civilians. No other public safety personnel. We 
gathered all the civilians up, got them out of the dust 
and debris, got them inside the building. After about 
15 minutes or so, two more ambulances arrived. Some 



5 
K. KELLEHER 



police arrived. 

The police had found a load of busses that 
were lined up by the Staten Island Ferry, so they moved 
everybody that was not injured out of the area on the 
busses. 

Q. Do you know where they took those people? 

A. North. 

PARAMEDIC MARQUEZ: They took them north down 

the FDR, I believe it was, and they were trying to 

load up ferries to get people out of Manhattan, 

into Jersey, and also to Staten Island. 

A. They wanted to get everybody out of the 
area. After we secured the area, anybody that was 
injured for - we set up a staging area and a treatment 
area at the Staten Island Ferry terminal, on the second 
floor we set the treatment area. Busses were staged 
outside. That's about it. We stayed there for most of 
the rest of the day. 

Q. Can you just indicate on the map I provided 
for you the number 1 where you picked up that injured 
police officer first? 

A. Sure. 

Q. You picked up the injured police officer on 
Exchange and Broadway? 



6 
K. KELLEHER 



A. Yes. 

Q. Then you proceeded to where? 

A. We proceeded to the Staten Island Ferry 
terminal. It's not shown on the map. It's south on 
Broadway. 

Q. What vehicle were you in? 

A. We were in vehicle 110. 

Q. Do you have anything else you would like to 
add to this? 

A. Just that when we were down there, we didn't 
know if we were cut off from the north. That's why we 
secured the Staten Island Ferry terminal. If we had 
patients, the only way we figured we were getting them 
out of there was on the ferry. So we wanted a secure 
area so we could treat them and get them out. It was 
rather eerie not hearing anything on the radio after 
the second tower came down. The radio was dead. For a 
long time we didn't know if we were the only people 
left down there. 

PARAMEDIC MARQUEZ: It was amazing how 

responding before the second tower fell and all 

the commotion in the street. Once the ball, it 

looked like a ball, was rolling towards us, this 

smoke and debris. Once it hit us, everything just 



7 
K. KELLEHER 



became silent. You could see people screaming and 

yelling but you couldn't hear anybody. Just 

quiet. 

A. (inaudible). 

PARAMEDIC MARQUEZ: Everything just became 
dark, pitch black and quiet. You saw people 
screaming, yelling and running, but you couldn't 
hear anything. Just silence, just complete 
silence. You couldn't hear. 

MR. ECCLESTON: I thank you very much for 
conducting this interview with me. The interview 
is concluded at 840. The setting on the tape 
counter is 143. 



File No. 9110029 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
PARAMEDIC FELIX MARQUEZ 
Interview Date: October 10, 2001 



Transcribed by Elisabeth F. Nason 



2 
F. MARQUEZ 



MR. ECCLESTON: Today's date is October 10, 

2001. The time is 819 hours. This is Christopher 

Eccleston of the Fire Department of the City of 

New York. I'm conducting an interview with the 

following individual. 

Q. Please state your name, rank title and 
assigned command area regarding the events of September 
11,2001. 

A. Felix Marquez, paramedic assigned to 
Battalion 20. 

MR. ECCLESTON: Also in the room is? 
PARAMEDIC KELLEHER: Paramedic Kevin 

Kelleher, shield 5044, assigned to Battalion 20. 

Q. Were you assigned to the World Trade Center 
disaster on September 1 1 , 2001 ? 

A. Yes, I was assigned to 03 x-ray. We were 
dispatched to the World Trade Center. 

Q. En route to the alarm, what did you see? 

A. En route to the alarm as we was on the 
Sheridan Expressway, we was able to see the towers on 
fire. We went down to the World Trade Center, down the 
FDR, down the east side. 

Q. When you arrived at the World Trade Center, 
where did you park your vehicle and what vehicle was 



3 
F. MARQUEZ 



it? 

A. It was vehicle 110,1 was the driver of the 
vehicle. We exited off the FDR around Battery Park. 
We was headed westbound down Maiden Lane when tower two 
collapsed. When tower two collapsed, we made a left 
on to Liberty back on to Broadway, trying to make our 
way away from the tower. It was very hard to see due 
to all the rubble and the dust. I remember on our 
radio was people screaming, asking for back up, telling 
that the tower was collapsing. 

We were trying to make our way to help to get 
people out, but we was unable to so we headed down, 
south down Broadway where we picked up a police 
Lieutenant, who was in distress. We put him into the 
back of the ambulance, me and Kevin, and we proceeded 
south bound down Broadway. 

Q. After you picked up this police officer, 
where did you respond with him? 

A. We headed - we just kept driving until we 
got to a safe distance away because we was unable to 
see due to all the dust and the debris and all the 
stuff that was falling. We just kept driving down, 
southbound down Broadway, until you couldn't go more no 
more. We ended up at South Ferry. 



4 
F. MARQUEZ 



Q. What happened with this police officer, did 
you — 

A. This police officer was at the tower, and he 
was able to get away. He was complaining of severe 
respiratory distress, so we got him in the back and we 
started treating him. As I was driving down, my 
partner, an EMT named, Juan Vega, was treating the 
patient. We stopped at South Ferry to proceed with our 
treatment and care for this police officer. 

Q. Did you turn over care and treatment to 
somebody else? Did you stay with him or did you go 
back up to the site? 

A. No, we stayed with the police officer and 
since we made South Ferry we realized this was a pretty 
safe distance away from the tower, a good place to 
reset staging. So me and my partner, Kevin Kelleher, 
got on the air and we said staging at South Ferry. 

Q. This was basically the first time you parked 
your vehicle. Can you indicate on the map I provided 
to you approximately where you stopped and parked your 
vehicle? 

A. Our first stop when we picked up the police 
officer was about Liberty and - Exchange, sorry. We 
came down Maiden Lane down Broadway. We got flagged 



5 
F. MARQUEZ 



down around Exchange and Broadway to pick up the police 
Lieutenant. That was our first stop, when we picked 
him up. 

Q. Can you just indicate on the map with a 
number 1. Okay. Then the next stop where you stopped 
your vehicle? 

A. It's not on this map. It's at the South 
Ferry, where the ferry goes to Staten Island. 

Q. When you stopped at South Ferry you set up a 
triage? 

A. Yes, we set up staging. 

Q. How long did you stay there for? 

A. I stayed there for approximately 12 hours. I 
was there for approximately 12 hours. There was a lot 
of patients over there complaining of distress. City 
workers, me and my partner parked the ambulance and 
started treating patients. 

Q. You remained in that staging area, you didn't 
go back up to Ground Zero to the site? 

A. Not until later on that evening. 

Q. Not until later on that evening. Okay. Who 
was the officer running that staging area, do you 
recall? 

A. Yes, after approximately an hour, hour, 45 



6 
F. MARQUEZ 



minutes, an hour, Chief Basile came to the scene. 

Q. Where were you when the second tower 
collapsed? 

A. We was by Maiden Lane and Broadway, in that 
area. 

Q. What were you doing there when the tower 
collapsed? 

A. We were responding to a unit in distress 
screaming for medics. 

Q. You were still driving? 

A. We were still driving, yes. We was trying to 
make our way to the corner of Church and Broadway. 

Q. Did you make any radio communications that 
might be important to us? 

A. Yes, we let the dispatcher know that that 
unit that was in distress, and screaming for 
paramedics, we told him that we would respond to that 
location. Dispatcher acknowledged it and we proceeded 
63 en route to Church and - I believe it was Church 
and Broadway. Church and Vesey, sorry. Church and 
Vesey. 

Q. Is there anything else you would like to add 
to this, any other information you might have, any 
feelings or emotions, anything you need to add? 



7 
F. MARQUEZ 



A. It was a hectic day. Other than that, we did 
the best we could do. That's pretty much it. 

MR. ECCLESTON: Thank you very much for your 
time. The time is now 826. This concludes our 
interview. The setting on the tape recorder is 
124. 



File No. 9110030 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
LIEUTENANT PATRICK SCARINGELLO 
Interview Date: October 10, 2001 



Transcribed by Elisabeth F. Nason 



2 
P. SCARINGELLO 



MR. ECCLESTON: Today is October 10, 2001. 

The time is 6:16 a.m. This is Christopher 

Eccleston of the Fire Department of the City of 

New York conducting an interview with the 

following individual. 

Q. Please state your name, rank and assigned 
command area of the Fire Department regarding the 
events of September 11, 2001. 

A. My name is Lieutenant Patrick Scaringello, 
assigned to Battalion 49, Bureau of EMS. 

Q. You were assigned to the World Trade Center 
disaster? 

A. Yes. 

Q. En route to the alarm, what did you see? 

A. I was told to stage at 21 Street and the 59 
Street Bridge. Three of my units were already being 
dispatched across the bridge to respond to the World 
Trade Center, which would have been 49 Victor, 45 Adam 
and 49 Henry. 

Time frame, as far as I put the time frame, I 
can't remember exactly. I don't believe they had 
completely cleared over the bridge when I was told to 
respond with the units from the staging area, which was 
49 Charlie, 46 William, I believe it was William, and 



3 
P. SCARINGELLO 



49 x-ray, I believe. I'm not too sure right now what 
they were. 

I was mid span at the 59 Street Bridge when I 
looked to my left and I saw the both towers were 
involved midway up. We then proceeded off the bridge 
and I opted against going down the FDR Drive because I 
figured that was going to be backed up with traffic. 
We took the city streets down, local streets, mainly on 
Broadway. Then I believe it was Second Avenue, we 
switched back and forth and I was following two 
unmarked cars. Unmarked law enforcement vehicles. 

We got down to Broadway, where originally we 
were told to stage at Vesey and Church. I couldn't get 
any of my vehicles down Vesey and Church because there 
were numerous vehicles parked there. So I parked them 
on Broadway, I continued down, parked my command car on 
Cortlandt between Broadway and Church. I then reported 
to the triage area at Church and Fulton, where I was 
advised to try to get the units, trying to get things 
as close as we could to that area. 

Then I went back up. I went back up to 
Broadway and advised the units to follow me down to 
Fulton, where I staged at Fulton and Broadway and 
reported down to the triage unit. As I reported back 



4 
P. SCARINGELLO 



to the triage area, Captain Olszewski had requested 
that I find some more triage tags, to help in triage. 
In doing so I was also helping to evacuate people from 
buildings and they were coming across the street and 
out of the subway. 

I got back to my truck. I got triage tags. 
I went back down to Fulton and Church, whereupon I 
found the Captain. Lt. Davila, Lt. Medjuck were 
elsewhere treating patients. I started to treat 
patients on my own when I heard the explosion from up 
above. I looked up, I saw smoke and flame and then I 
saw the top tower tilt, start to twist and lean. 

With that, there was a massive influx of 
humanity rushing past me. Most of the people had made 
it through the triage area. Some had stumbled and 
fallen. I grabbed them, helped them underneath, and 
behind a police van, whereupon I put my body over them, 
about 4 people that I can remember. We rode out the 
first tower in that location. Once it had lightened 
up, because the smoke and ash had darkened everything 
down, once it had lightened up, I instructed all four 
people to hold my hand. We crossed over on Fulton 
against the wall from Saint Pauls cemetery and I 
instructed them to follow me up to Broadway against, on 



5 
P. SCARINGELLO 



the sidewalk against the wall. 

Halfway up, someone met us there, I believe 
from the Police Department, I handed them off to them 
and returned back into Fulton and Church. I was 
assisting in pulling more people out from debris, when 
I heard the second tower explode. When I tried to 
evacuate the area, by running up Fulton, got halfway 
up. I couldn't get into any doorway, where I found a 
window that was partially broken, I broke the rest of 
the glass and went through and into the building. 

Found myself in a lobby of sorts, I believe 
it was the Thompson's Financial Building. I entered 
into the lobby. I found approximately 50 people. I 
announced who I was, asked if there was any police 
officers or firemen in the building or in the lobby. I 
had one fireman I identified complaining of a 
laceration to the back of his left leg. There was a 
Port Authority police officer, myself and the police 
officer tried to bandage the fireman's leg as best we 
could, with whatever we could find. I then instructed 
all the people there that -- once the outside cleared 
from the smoke and debris from the second tower, I 
walked them out the door, again holding hands across 
the street. 



6 
P. SCARINGELLO 



When we got across Broadway, I told them to 
make a left and head north on Broadway. Once all the 
police had evacuated that building, I went back down 
Fulton and again continued to try to find people in the 
rubble. 

Q. Can you just indicate on the map exactly 
where you parked your vehicle or to the best of your 
knowledge when you arrived on the scene? 

A. When I first arrived on the scene, I was 
halfway down Cortlandt Street, reported to the triage 
area, which was in front of the Millennium Hotel. I 
ran down Cortlandt to Church and up Church to the 
Millennium, where they advised me to restage my 
vehicles on Broadway. I went back to my vehicle. Made 
a u-turn on Cortlandt, came up to Broadway, and parked 
it on the corner of Fulton and Broadway and then 
reported back down to the triage area. 

Q. Can you just put a number 1 where you first 
parked your vehicle and number 2 where you moved your 
vehicle to? Do you happen to remember which vehicle 
number this was? 

A. 840. 

Q. 840. Did you ever enter any of the World 
Trade Center buildings prior to their collapse? 



7 
P. SCARINGELLO 



A. No, never got a chance to. I was involved in 
patient care at the triage area. 

Q. Did you remove any civilians to hospitals or 
just away from the scene? 

A. Just away from the scene. Most of the 
civilians that I did see, did have contact with were 
walking wounded. They were very ambulatory. Most who 
had any sort of injury did not affect them moving away 
from the scene. 

Q. You had told me when you were traveling there 
you had several units with you. Can you tell me the 
personnel there were on those units, to the best of 
your recollection? 

A. Two of the units were voluntary units. I 
think it was 49 x-ray or 49 William. The other one was 
46, either a 46 William, one was a William, one was a 
(inaudible). 

Q. Do you know the names of the people that were 
on that unit? 

A. No. 

Q. How about any Fire Department units? 

A. 49 Charlie was behind me. That was Brendon 
Mulroy and I think his partner was Mario, I'm not sure 
now. I think it was Mario Ramirez. 



8 
P. SCARINGELLO 



Q. That was the only Fire Department unit you 
had with you? 

A. That was 49 Charlie, yes. The other three 
already went over the bridge. That was 9 Victor, 5 
Adam and 9 Henry. They were already ahead of us. 

Q. Okay. Was there any important radio 
communications that you made? 

A. None other than advising Citywide where we 
were staged and what I had there and them telling me to 
respond. We responded I believe right after the second 
tower was hit. I think Citywide just pulled the pin. 

No, I don't even think it was Citywide. I think we 
were still on Queens. Queens just said respond in, 
send everything in. 

Q. Is there anything else you would like to add 
to this interview? 

A. What else do you need? 

Q. Anything else you would like to add, any 
feelings, emotions, anything? 

A. I did stay in the area. In fact I worked my 
way up because there was nobody else around, no EMS 
personnel, I worked my way up eventually to Church -- 
to Chambers and West, where they had a command post. 

Q. What kind of command post is that? 



9 
P. SCARINGELLO 



A. A haphazard one. Everybody was looking for 
some sort of direction to go in, but they were trying 
to regroup at the time. 

Q. Do you remember who was in charge of the 
command post there? 

A. Pick a Chief. Pick a Chief. They were all 
there and everybody had something to say. I inquired 4 
or 5 times where my partner was. 

Q. Can you tell me which Chiefs were there that 
you remember seeing? 

A. J. P. Martin, Perrugia, Carassquillo. That's 
about all I can remember right now. But I was able to 
work my way back down West Street and I did find my 
partner, Lieutenant Yioras. 

Q. Do you know about what time this was that you 
got to this command post? 

A. It was well after tower one fell, which was 
the second tower. 

Q. Well after meaning an hour, two hours, three 
hours? 

A. No, I don't think it was an hour. It may 
have been maybe 40 minutes at most. I did find my 
partner. We then worked our way up West Street or down 
West Street toward the center again, where we came upon 



10 
P. SCARINGELLO 



a Captain, Captain McFarland. She instructed us that 
she was looking for some of our people that were there 
and she had instructed Lieutenant Yioras and I to work 
our way back up toward Church to see if anybody was 
there. We did go past -- we went up Church, we went up 
Vesey, past 7 Trade, which at the time didn't look like 
it was involved, but we found later on that it was. We 
crossed over. Then we wound up on Barclay. No, we 
wound up -- came up Vesey. 

There was a -- they started setting up a 
medical triage treatment area in a building, an office 
building, lobby of an office building there. Chief 
Wells was there. Lieutenant Race, Chief Wells 
instructed me to set up transport and staging, which I 
did on Vesey. About that time is when Lieutenant 
Yioras advised me that he started getting chest pains. 

We had it checked out. I then set up -- 1 
brought a unit up, and was ready to have him 
transported along with EMT Adams, Paul Adams, who was 
also complaining of more pain. They were placed in an 
ambulance and they were dispatched to hospital 71. 
This is the part that steams me. Somewhere between 
where we sent them out from that section to hospital 
71, the ambulance was stopped by one of our 



11 

P. SCARINGELLO 



Lieutenants. Told both of them to step out of the 
ambulance, that it wasn't an emergency, commandeered 
the ambulance and they were later on placed in another 
ambulance and then brought to hospital 71. Okay. 

At that time, after they were gone, I worked 
my way back down with the voluntary units, I don't 
remember which ones they were, where I set up the 
voluntary units in the staging. I worked my way down 
to the corner of Church and Vesey, where I was told 
they brought a patient into the Church, which later I 
found out to be Father Judge. 

They worked on Father Judge in the church 
where he expired. We then had a unit standing by. We 
put his body in an ambulance and dispatched that 
ambulance out. We then were told by PD that the area 
was possibly in a collapse zone because of tower 7. We 
evacuated the church. As I was leaving the church 
there was a small man sitting on one of the pews. I 
ran back in the Church. I found it to be one of the 
Fathers, a priest, saying his rosary. I went in and I 
excused myself for interrupting him in the middle of 
his rosary. I advised him we were in a collapse zone 
and we had to leave, which we did. Just before we left 
the church he advised me that the sacrament was still 



12 
P. SCARINGELLO 



in the tabernacle. I told him that I would try to find 
somebody to remove it. I then escorted him down the 
stairs. I handed him off to another person, to another 
set of EMTs, who walked him up the street. 

Went back in the Church. I went up to the 
altar. I was looking, yelling for somebody who was 
there. No response. I quickly left the building 
because of the possibility of being in a collapse 
zone. 

I then stayed down in that corner helping to 
evacuate people that came out of any of the other 
buildings. 

Q. Do you know about what time we are talking 
now, time frame? 

A. I would say probably about 45 minutes to an 
hour before 7 dropped, because when tower 7 dropped, I 
was on Vesey and Church. 

Q. This was before tower 7 dropped? 

A. This is just before tower 7 dropped. 

Q. Tower 7 fell at approximately 5:25. 

A. Like I said, I spent the majority of my time 
with the exception of the time that I went up to 
Chambers, all my time was spent on the east side of 7, 
because that's where my first three units came in on 



13 
P. SCARINGELLO 



the west side. The three units I brought in were on 
the east side. I tried to make sure those people were 
accounted for. 

I got halfway up to the corner of Church and 
Vesey when tower 7 dropped, which basically the 
concussion just blew me across the street and I came up 
again besides, past Saint Pauls and it was already late 
at night and it was dark. The smoke didn't help it 
any, the dust and everything else. I was hit in the 
back of the head with something that came out of one of 
the buildings, which later I found out to be a water 
pitcher. 

They had evacuated that medical zone earlier, 
which I was involved in making sure my vehicles were 
out of there, again, just making sure that nobody was 
in the area. They told me that they were relocating to 
Pace. I had started to come up, I tried to find my 
command car, which I knew where I left. Unfortunately 
it wasn't there. I came walking back. I went as far 
as Cortlandt and all the way back down to Barclay. I 
kept saying I knew where I left my command car, that's 
when I realized somebody had stolen my command car. 

Q. Did you ever retrieve your command car? 

A. From what I understood the next day somebody 



14 
P. SCARINGELLO 



said that they had called here asking if that was ours, 
they found it on 14 Street and Irving Avenue. 

Q. We are going to try to concern with anything 
that happened before noon. That's what we are trying 
to concentrate on, not the later part of the day. Is 
there anything you need to add to this on anything that 
happened before 12 noon? 

A. You know, I tell you the God's honest truth, 
Chris, once you got there I didn't even notice the 
time. Couldn't even tell time. Once the first tower 
came down, there was no such thing as a watch. My main 
function was looking for people, pulling people out and 
making sure they were safe. We never got into any 
building. The only thing I dealt with was from 
Cortlandt to Barclay, from Broadway to I guess West. 
That area was my main concentration, with the exception 
of the way I worked my way around to Chambers. 

There was -- after both towers, I was still 
looking for people, I did run into Lieutenant Davila 
and another -- I'm sorry, not Davila, Lieutenant 
Medjuck and one of our telemetry doctors, I believe, 
they were telling me I had to go to -- they had to 
report to the Battery. When they started walking north 
and I kept telling them, no, you're going the wrong 



15 
P. SCARINGELLO 



way. They in turn walked back. We did go down to 
-- we did walk down to Beekman Downtown. 

I went into the ER to check to see if any of 
our people were there. I came back out. They were 
gone. So I worked my way back into this area to get to 
try to reestablish something and find out who was 
there. I never again saw Captain Olszewski. I don't 
know what ever happened to her or where she went. I 
seemed to be the only one in this area. Everyone else 
I would imagine was gathered on the south, they were 
all around here. 

Q. Along the west side? 

A. Along the west side, because I think that's 
where the main body of people were advised to report 
to. 

Q. Is there anything else you feel you need to 
add to this? 

A. No, just that this was the big one everybody 
trains for. 

MR. ECCLESTON: It certainly was. I thank 

you very much for the interview. The time is 

6:41. The counter on the tape player is 375. 



File No. 9110035 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
PARAMEDIC DANIEL RIVERA 
Interview Date: October 10, 2001 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



D. RIVERA 2 

MS. BASTEDENBECK: Today is October 

10th, 2001. The time is 1520 hours. My 

name is Chris Bastedenbeck. I work for the 

New York City Fire Department. I'm 

conducting an interview with the following 

individual. 

Please state your name, your rank, your 

title, where you're assigned. 

PARAMEDIC RIVERA: Daniel Rivera, 

paramedic. I'm assigned to Battalion 31, 

Station 36 in Brooklyn. 

Q. I'd just like you to give me the events 
of September 1 1th, 2001 . 

A. Okay. I basically started my -we 
were gassing up at Tillary and Gold Street, which 
is two blocks away from the Brooklyn Bridge, when 
we heard the commotion over the PD radio that a 
plane just hit one of the towers. 

We got on the bridge, because we were, 
again, two blocks away from there, and called the 
dispatcher over the radio - actually over the 
phone cause the radio was really bad, and let 
them know that we were on our way to that call. 
She said 10-4, and she assigned us the job. That 



D. RIVERA 3 

was two minutes after the first plane hit. 

Q. The dispatcher that you spoke to was 
the Brooklyn dispatcher? 

A. Yes, Brooklyn. 

So it took us about four minutes to get 
to the scene, because we were really, really 
close. We parked in front of the south tower 
right in front of the building. 

Q. When you say "Right in front of the 
building" - 

A. Right here. Actually in front of Four 
World Trade Center and in back of the south tower 
building. 

Q. Okay. So somewhere right in the 
complex? 

A. Right in the front right here. Maybe 
about one yard away from the south tower 
building. 

Q. So that was when you first arrived? 

A. Right. 

There was a lot of people running just 
every direction, and several people were hurt. 
At that time I was treating one patient who was 
on the ground with a laceration to his forehead, 



D. RIVERA 4 

and actually I think it was a total of three 
patients, one asthmatic and I don't remember the 
other patient. 

As I was treating the patient with the 
laceration and the asthmatic patient, that's when 
the second plane hit. All I heard was just a 
thunderous noise. As I looked up, I saw a ball 
of flames coming down. So everyone ran, the 
patients and everyone. 

I ran not too far, a couple steps 
behind me, next to this doughnut cart, and hid 
under there until everything was clear and we 
went right back. Basically that's when I 
realized it was a terrorist attack. 

Basically there were too many patients 
at the time, and you really couldn't triage 
anyone. It was just too dangerous. The scene 
wasn't safe. So we were just basically 
helping - at that point I don't know what I'm 
talking about. Everyone pretty much split up. 

Then I went and I started directing 
people from the building, from the south tower, 
to get out, because as they were coming out of 
the building, they were getting on their phones 



D. RIVERA 5 

and talking and blocking the entrance. So we 
just said, "Let's go. You've got to go." 

Q. Did you go into the building actually? 

A. Yes, I went into the south tower 
building, but came right out right by the doors. 
I was trying to figure out why there wasn't too 
many people coming out. Like I said, there was a 
lot of people on their cell phones. I guess when 
they got to the lobby they thought it was safe 
and they decided to just get on their cell phones 
and talk and block the entrances. I was making 
sure that the entrances were clear so everyone 
can pass. 

Q. The south tower, do you know if you 
were out on Liberty Street? 

A. I don't remember. 

Q. You don't remember. Okay. 

A. I don't remember. You know what, I 
could have been on this side. I don't remember 
that. 

Basically once I did that, I got 
together with my partner, and he moved the 
vehicle two blocks behind, somewhere around here 
somewhere, behind Four World Trade Center, I 



D. RIVERA 6 

think. 

Q. Like by Trinity? 

A. Yeah, around here, somewhere around - 
yeah, Liberty and around here somewhere, Trinity 
and Liberty around here, I think. 

Once we saw all that happening, we 
needed to move the bus. 

Q. Okay. 

A. So what else happened? 

Q. When you moved out the bus out to 
there, did you see anybody? Any EMS supervisors 
or firemen supervisors? 

A. There was a supervisor, but he was 
pretty much overwhelmed, but don't I remember his 
name. He was pretty much overwhelmed. It wasn't 
textbook. It was basically everyone for 
themselves after the second explosion. 

I saw Manny Delgado. I saw some other 
people. Like I said, it was crazy, really crazy. 
Everything pretty much calmed down. 
Once the second plane hit, it wasn't too bad. 
People still running out of the building. Body 
parts, I think that was the worst. Every three 
seconds I was counting - I counted about 26 



D. RIVERA 7 

bodies when I was there. Every three seconds 
somebody was jumping. 

At that point we were triage - we were 
what they call front line medics. There was a 
captain there - I don't know his name - from 
EMS. He was setting everyone up, saying the 
medics were going to go in first, the EMTs were 
going in behind us. 

They didn't let us go in because it was 
dangerous. We were right in front of the 
building still. We had no idea the buildings 
were going to collapse. That was dangerous where 
we were anyway. 

I think it took about 30 minutes or 40 
minutes after the second collapse. After the 
second plane hit the south tower building, and 
then the building collapsed. 

Q. When the building collapsed where were 
you? 

A. I was right in front of the building, 
right in front. 

Q. You were still - 

A. Right, because what happened was 
that - 



D. RIVERA 8 

Q. - up near Trinity and Liberty? 

A. No, we moved the bus to Trinity, but we 
went back to right in front of south tower, 
because triage - I'm not too sure if it was over 
here. I think it was over here somewhere. 
Triage was still right in front of the south 
tower building. 

Q. So you parked your vehicle? 

A. My partner parked the vehicle, so I'm 
not too sure exactly where he parked it. I know 
he parked it two blocks up. 

Q. And then you both went back into the 
complex? 

A. I think it was around here somewhere. 
Around here somewhere we had triage. I know it 
was either this building or this building. I 
think it was over here we were triaging or over 
here. I'm not too sure. This is the south 
tower; right? This is the first one that 
collapsed. Yeah. 

So we were pretty much - most of the 
workers were inside this building. Like I said, 
I don't know if it's Five World Trade Center or 
Four World Trade Center. Most of them were in 



D. RIVERA 9 

the building because the chief or the captain 
said if you want you can stay inside that 
building. But I didn't feel safe, because I knew 
it was a terrorist attack, so I was scared. 
Every time you hear a plane, everyone would run. 
So I pretty much stood around here somewhere. I 
would see triage, but I was pretty much in 
between the two buildings. 

Then that's when - I kept on walking 
close to the south tower, and that's when that 
building collapsed. 

Q. How did you know that it was coming 
down? 

A. That noise. It was a noise. 

Q. What did you hear? What did you see? 

A. It was a frigging noise. At first I 
thought it was - do you ever see professional 
demolition where they set the charges on certain 
floors and then you hear "Pop, pop, pop, pop, 
pop"? That's exactly what - because I thought 
it was that. When I heard that frigging noise, 
that's when I saw the building coming down. 

Q. What did you do? 

A. Run. Most of the people ran into the 



D.RIVERA 10 

building, but I was just too far from the 
building to run into this triage building. I 
basically just ran up this way, right up here. I 
don't know if I was here or I was here. But I 
ran up - I was really close. I thought I was 
dead because it was just too close to the 
building. It was just too close. I said, this 
is I don't know how many stories. 

I ran as fast as I could maybe half a 
block and then hid between a building that had 
some kind of indention like this, just hid like 
that. Actually I found a stretcher. I covered 
myself with a stretcher. That's when everything 
came down. 

It was very dark for a few minutes. I 
think at that time my partner went under the fire 
truck, he was telling me. Everyone pretty much 
went on their own. 

So once that cleared, I went right back 
and started pulling out people. Basically 
everyone was dead at that time with the first 
collapse. 

Q. When that dust cleared and you went 
back, where did you go back to? 



D.RIVERA 11 

A. Right back to the triage, to triage. 

Q. So in front of this building again? 

A. Right, right here. 

Q. In front of the World Trade Center, the 
northeast corner? 

A. But there was nobody in there. 
Apparently everyone ran and came out through 
here. So I ran in here. There was basically no 
one around just a few firefighters in shock. 
Then the next thing you know, the next building 
collapsed. I was right in front of that 
building. 

Q. So you were still over there when the 
second building collapsed? 

A. Right, because I ran back. Not too 
bright of me, of course. I ran right back in, 
and I was right - I could actually touch the 
building when it collapsed, the second time when 
it collapsed. 

But again, I was prepared because I 
heard that same noise. It was like a waterfall 
noise. That's when I ran. As I ran in here, I 
didn't run too far. Again, it was like a little 
indention in the building where the same thing 



D.RIVERA 12 

again. That's when I jumped, because it was just 
too close. That one got me pretty good. 

Q. So you were outside. You never ran 
inside a building when either one of the towers 
collapsed? 

A. No. The first, south tower - after 
the second plane hit, just to clear the doorway, 
and then I came running back out. I didn't stay 
there too long. 

Q. As the collapses were going on, you 
never - 

A. No, I was thinking about going into a 
building, because as I saw the first building 
collapse, I noticed that the first three or four 
floors, they were still pretty good. That was on 
my mind, wow, they were still pretty good. So 
when the second building collapsed, I was 
thinking of standing between the doors of the 
second collapse. Something told me no, just ran 
back. 

Again, I ran up against one of the 
buildings there. Once everything settled again, 
it was dark again. Deja vu, you know. But I was 
really lucky because that building had damage on 



D.RIVERA 13 

top of me. Everything around me was destroyed. 
The fire truck in front of me was destroyed. 
Everything. I had to touch myself to see if I 
was alive. 

Then I ran right back, because there 
wasn't much too run, and that's when you hear on 
the radio EMS people down, fire down. I ran 
there, and then I ran back over here, because I 
think they started another triage point around 
here somewhere, triage center. I ran back in 
there. 

Then they said there was a lot of 
people trapped inside. That's when I right back 
in, after both buildings collapsed. There were 
several firefighters down there and battalion 
chiefs. I didn't know they were battalion 
chiefs, but they were when we pulled them out. 

Q. So after the second building collapsed, 
you ended up over here by Trinity Street? 

A. I was over here, right, and then I ran 
back over here somewhere. Because after the 
first collapse they pretty much set another 
triage center around here somewhere. I'm not too 
sure if it's over here. Then when the second 



D. RIVERA 14 

building collapsed, I couldn't run far because it 
was right there. Then once everything settled I 
ran right back to the triage area. 

Q. And the triage was, you think - 

A. Somewhere, right. 

Q. - somewhere by Trinity, about midway 
through the - 

A. Right, I'm not too - right. 

Then that's when we found out - 
basically I was looking for my partner. I 
couldn't find my partner. When I went back in 
there, he was there. He needed some oxygen 
because he had stuff all over his face. Then 
that's when the radio call came in that we had 
EMS and fire trapped. I ran back in here, 
somewhere over there. 

There was just no one around. It was 
very, very bad. You couldn't breathe too good. 
That's when I saw several firefighters who were 
out. So we pulled out about three firefighters 
that were covered in rubble. 

Q. What happened to them; do you know? 

A. One guy - I can't forget him because 
he was pretty heavy. I'll probably get in 



D. RIVERA 15 

trouble. He weighed 400 pounds. The worst part 
about this, when this building collapsed, it was 
very difficult to walk through all this. 

Q. When the south tower came down? 

A. The south tower, right. So when this 
building collapsed, pretty much everything here 
you couldn't recognize it anymore. So it took a 
while before you could actually walk from this 
point here all the way back here. This is where 
we had several trapped firefighters here. 

Q. Over by - 

A. Firefighters, right. There were lots 
of firefighters here. There was - 

Q. By the customs building? 

A. Right, but more - right, right. Right 
around in between and Five World Trade Center. 
This tower here, you saw about 20 ESU guys on the 
second floor. Don't ask me how they got there. 
They were climbing down. So it looks like they 
were there when it collapsed. There was a ladder 
here. They were repelling down. 

I was shocked because I tried to figure 
out how they made it, because they went from I 
think second or third floor and they were 



D.RIVERA 16 

repelling. 

Q. This is where you ended up staying the 
rest of the day? 

A. No, this is crazy. You couldn't stay 
here, because you had - everything was destroyed 
pretty much around here. Again, don't ask me why 
I went back in. It was really bad. I pretty 
much went back to this original spot here at 
Church and Trinity, I think. Then they directed 
us somewhere else around here. 

Q. Who directed you? A supervisor? 

A. Right, some supervisor. 

Q. Do you know where you ended up? 

A. By the water somewhere around here. 

Q. By Battery Park? 

A. Right, somewhere around here somewhere. 
Then they said that there was a gas leak and that 
was too dangerous, so we walked from - we were 
here somewhere. Then they took us all the way 
to - not Chambers. What's that place on the 
west side. Pier 94. 

Q. That's where you ended up after all 
that stuff? 

A. After all that. 



D.RIVERA 17 

Q. So you ended up at Pier 94. 

A. Right. 

Q. I forgot what I was going to ask you. 
What happened to your vehicle? 

A. We moved the vehicle. It had several 
holes. We had no idea it had several holes. 

Q. So it ended up staying there and got 
damaged? 

A. Staying there and then moving it, 
right. Basically every time it would collapse, 
my partner would go in the vehicle and move it. 
So that's why our vehicle was the only one pretty 
much that made it. There was another vehicle I 
think too. 

One of the news channels - I saw I 
think it was the south building somebody with a 
camera running out of the south tower building. 
You actually could see my vehicle right in front 
of the tower, right in front. But that's before 
the second collapse -the second airplane hit. 
So we pretty much moved everything. 

Q. You said at the end of the day you and 
your partner were together with your vehicle? 

A. Yes. We picked up another ALS unit who 



D.RIVERA 18 

lost their vehicle. So we had two ALS unit in 
one vehicle. We went to triage at that point at 
Pier 95 I think. 

Q. Anything else you want to add to this? 

A. I'm looking at the times here. It felt 
more like five minutes, the whole thing. 

Q. That's the kind of stuff I want you to 
say, how you perceived everything. 

A. Like I say, once I saw the second 
plane, then I knew, that's it. It wasn't by 
accident. Then I started thinking about the 
World Trade Center, how everyone lined up, the 
ambulances and the fire trucks and I thought, the 
terrorists know exactly how we lined up last 
time, and we're doing it again. We pretty much 
did, line up exactly the same way as the last 
time. That was my wording. 

At that point honestly there was no one 
to rescue at the two buildings. The worst part 
was when a surgeon came up to me as we were 
traveling and he's like, "Guys, listen, medics, 
we've got four surgeons, 18 doctors, and they 
were setting up a triage point." I told him 
that's nice but I don't think anyone's going to 



D.RIVERA 19 

come. 

Because I was one of the few units that 
came out of there, and when we saw what 
happened - that's why I left, because basically 
there was no one alive. We just pulled out 
several firefighters and that's it. We went 
back. There was nothing else to do. We were 
crazy to stay there, because you still had this 
thing about airplanes going to hit other 
buildings, and the other buildings around you 
weren't safe, because the building I was hiding 
next to, that one was leaning and I heard that 
one collapsed too. 

It was bad. That's pretty much it. 
Q. All right. You have nothing else you 
want to add; right? 

A. No. I hope you can understand what I 
say because I talk kind of fast. 

MS. BASTEDENBECK: This concludes the 
interview with paramedic - 

PARAMEDIC RIVERA: Daniel Rivera. 

MS. BASTEDENBECK: - Daniel Rivera. 
The time now is 1539 hours. 



File No. 9110036 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMT-P ANDRE CHERRINGTON 
Interview Date: October 10, 2001 



A. CHERRINGTON 



A. CHERRINGTON 

CHRISTINE BASTEDENBECK:Today's date is October 10, 2001. The time is 1712 
hours. My name is Christine Bastedenbeck, I work with the New York City Fire 
Department. Today I'm conducting and interview with the following individual, 

ANDRE CHERRINGTON: Paramedic Andre Cherrington, from battalion 31, 

unit 31 Victor, tour 2 

Q: Okay, I'm just gonna ask you to tell me about the events of the morning of 

September 11 th , 2001 

A: Okay. 

Q: In your words. 

A: Alright, what happened was, I logged on. I started work at 8:30, and I was 

working with a gentleman who was doing overtime, so we were on our way to get some 
breakfast, and we looked to our left as we were pulling out of the garage, and we saw like a 
blast. But it didn't seem like anything major. But then we saw the World Trade Center like, 
catch on fire. So I turned on 1010 W.I.N.S. to see if there was any news and they said that 
a plane hit. So we were thinking maybe a small plane ran out of gas and hit the building. 
So we were like okay, let's call the dispatcher. The dispatcher had already started sending 
units. So we said well listen, 31 Victor, we are able to go. Can you send us? So they sent 
us over there. So we went on the Brooklyn Bridge, I was driving, we went on the Brooklyn 
bridge and I'm seeing people already coming across. So we got across over there, I'd say 
by city hall park and I saw a Lieutenant, Brynes from Battalion 57. And I was talking to 
him, he stopped us and people were coming to the ambulance. Nothing major, just people 
with minor cuts and scrapes. He had another unit there, so we triaged a couple of 
patients, then I requested to go more towards where it seemed more people would be hurt. 
I said to the Lieutenant, well I'm a paramedic, they probably might need me more in there. 
So he released us, said okay, find someone closer to the area, another lieutenant. So we 
went down Broadway, and as I'm driving down Broadway, everyone's stopping the 
ambulance and coming up to us and saying so-and-so is hurt, and so-and-so is having a 
heart attack. So we stopped by each patient and pulled out the triage tags. Everyone was 



A. CHERRINGTON 
basically a green tag, so we just kept triaging people en route to the World Trade Center. 
When we got there, we got there, I guess 9:00, 9:05, whatever, and I seen Phil Ashby there 
and he was doing triage from inside the building. We started triaging right away. I was 
taking care of a patient who was having a hard time breathing and my Partner was taking 
care of another patient. That patient jumped on, Metropolitan actually took that patient to 
the hospital. While Metropolitan took that person to the hospital, somebody came to my 
partner and said we have another person who's burnt up in the building. 

Q: At this point, had the second plane crashed into the second building? 

A: In all honesty, everything happened so fast, and it was so hectic that I 

wasn't really paying attention to it. It seemed like, you know, all the ashes were falling, it 
was just a big mess. Everybody was screaming, so I don't really know. I just know what 
was going on as far as me and my partner were concerned. So, when we went to the 
second building, I think it was the second building, and we seen a guy burnt up, 
downstairs in the lobby. So we carried him, and we brought him on our stretcher, it was 
parked by the ambulance. We put him in the stretcher, while we're taking care of him 
we're seeing everybody running out of the second building and it was just like everybody 
running, everybody trying to just get outta there. So it's like, okay, fine, we're taking care 
of this guy. We had to just cool down his wounds. He was burnt up, he had like 90% 
burns over his body. Like first, second degree burns. A couple third degree burns also. 
So we took care of him, got an IV in him, and were ready to transport him. The Lieutenant 
on the scene said don't take him yet cause there's more patients coming down. I waited 
for a few minutes, maybe five minutes. And it was like a cluster, so -- 1 just decided, you 
know, let me take this guy, cause he started having shortness of breath. I couldn't call for 
anything to stabilize him, cause there was a mess there, you know, before I intubated him. 
So I said, let me take him to the hospital. So as I was pulling off, I'd say about half a block 
away, we heard a big boom, and we seen a whole bunch of ashes, everything just started 
coming towards us. So I actually stopped the ambulance for thirty seconds and I looked. 
My partner was in the back he said stop the ambulance. So I stopped and I looked, and I 



A. CHERRINGTON 
seen all the debris coming. So I said close the bus. Cause at this point everyone started 
running towards the ambulance, I mean, you know, we had one critical patient there, so I 
said let me just get this guy to the hospital. So he closed the ambulance. And as I'm 
driving, people are running and debris is coming down. Debris is coming down and 
hitting the bus. I'm just driving, driving, I drove up a one-way, I think it was Second 
Avenue. One of those major avenues. And I drove halfway up to Cornell, and then I got on 
the right way, and I drove the rest of the way up to Cornell. When we got to Cornell, I think 
I gave a notification, when I got to Cornell, they immediately took the patient in and they 
intubated the patient. As I was leaving they said the second building fell. When the 
second building fell, I said well, we gotta get back there. So we went back there, where 
they told us to go to Battery Park triage. So we went to Battery Park. When we went there 
now, they said that there was a gas leak. So I had the ambulance parked, and I was 
actually on the other side of the street, they said that there's a gas leak, get outta there. I 
didn't have enough time to jump into the ambulance, so I just started going towards-with 
the crowd, running more or less until there was a bus that me and my partner jumped in 
and we went to Pier 94. When we got to Pier 94, it seemed like it was a false alarm. 

Q: Do you know whos vehicle it was you jumped into? 

A: My partner knew who it was, but I think they were from Manhattan. I'd 

never seen the guy before. 

Q: Was it a Fire Department vehicle? 

A: It was EMS, yeah, EMS vehicle. 

Q: Who was your partner that day? 

A: Suarez, he's a new paramedic. And we jumped in that ambulance, and 

whoever the guy was drove all the way to Pier 94. All three of us were in the front. When 
we got there, we found out that it was more or less a false alarm, so I walked back towards 
my vehicle, but they wouldn't let us over there. By the time I got over there the vehicle 
was already gone. So I said, oh well, you know. So I jumped in with 31 Young, who is 
Paramedic Smiley and Paramedic Rivera. And basically I stayed with them all day, and 



A. CHERRINGTON 
what we did is we went back towards City Hall Park to see if anyone was needing triage, if 
anybody needed us. But by then they already had a major triage center set up, so nobody 
needed us. We were trying to go where we were needed. Cause you know, we didn't 
really have anybody really telling us what to do over the airway so, we finally wound up on 
the backside of BMCC where we set up a triage center, us and a couple BLS. Finally some 
lieutenants came over and they said okay, you guys stay over here, just in case, cause one 
of the buildings was on fire. The last building to fall was on fire. He said it might drop. So 
we waited there to see if anything was going to happen. The only thing that happened was 
that the building dropped. We waited to see if anybody was hurt, but everybody seemed 
to be evacuated, everything was fine. So from there, we stayed there for a few hours. You 
know, just triaging, waiting. And after that, it seemed like it was okay. So another 
lieutenant came there and said well, they might need some paramedics at Ground Zero. 
They were saying something about there were amputated patients there who, once they 
get them out of the rubble, they're gonna need us to start lines, whatever and get them to 
the nearest hospital. So we went back to Ground Zero. There we reported to another 
Lieutenant who I really, I really didn't keep any names. But I know that it was really hectic 
over there. So we reported there, all four paramedics, and we were like, okay, we're here 
and we're ready to help if anybody needs any help from us. And we basically just stood 
there, and what we did there was, if anybody got cut.. .it was minor triage more or less. 
The seemed to have everything under control there. So basically, we just stayed there 
waiting, just on stand-by. We pulled our ambulance into their little bay, into their bay, and 
we just waited there. But around 2:30, you know, I realized there's nothing we can really 
do here. There's nothing going on here, it was more like a BLS thing, you know, minor 
cuts, abrasions, whatever. By then, my partner already worked over 30 hours so he was 
really tired. So I talked to the lieutenant, I said, you know, we're really not needed here. 
I've been here since 8:30 this morning, you know, can you release us? So basically... 
Q: This is 2:30 in the morning? 



A. CHERRINGTON 

A: 2:30 in the morning, yeah. So basically after that, we seen that there's 

nothing that we could do, so he released us and we came back to Brooklyn. That was it. 
So you know, that day I thank my lucky stars. Cause you know, I think that if I would have 
actually waited around for more patients, I think instead of seeing the rubble coming 
towards me and I'm booking, I think the rubble would've actually hit the bus with the guy 
in there. I think it would have been a very bad situation. So for some reason I said, you 
know, I'm not staying, I'm leaving. It was kind of like a free-for-all, because, you know, 
what happened was, when we got there, we thought everything was okay, everything is 
calm. Maybe the little plane hit and it's causing all this. But I guess when the second 
plane hit, that's when all hell broke loose. And that's when everybody realized, you know, 
nothing's calm. Everything just went crazy after that. I mean, I did what I had to do, I took 
one patient, we took care of it and got him to the hospital. And you know, I did say, well I 
saved one person. I know I did save one person, and that's all that matters. I was there 
for X Amount of hours and I did one good thing. And my partner too. 

Q: Everything you did was good. 

A: Well, yeah. I mean, you know, everything I did was good. But I feel good 

that I did get that guy to the hospital. As a matter of fact, I looked at the ACR and the guy 
lived not far from where I lived. So I think that two days later I went over to the address 
and I thought his wife was there, but it was his mother. And his mother happens to be a 
nurse at Methodist Hospital. I approached here. Because I heard on the news that they 
said, well we don't know what's going on. A lot of family members, they don't know 
what's going on with the people in the building. So I said, let me go over there and let her 
know where her son is, where her husband is (I thought it was his wife.) When I got there, 
it was the mother. I told her, this is where your son is, this is the condition that he was in. 
And she was very happy about it, you know she was real happy. And I felt good too, you 
know, I felt good. Everything worked out. He was pretty bad though, he was real bad. But 
you know, I never really contacted them again. Maybe one day when everything calms 
down, hopefully I'll hear that he's still alive and that he's coming out of the hospital, you 



A. CHERRINGTON 
know? But it was a situation, and at the time, you know, you're not really thinking about it, 
you know you're just like okay, let me just do what I have to do. And you know, I'm pretty 
much like, I was in the Army, so I pretty much know how to keep my cool. And the triage 
also helped a lot. Cause I think if I didn't know that, I probably would have had everybody 
on my bus. Because everybody had the M.I. or seizures, but it was just, everyone was in 
shock. They couldn't believe it, you know? So it's like, let me just triage this one, triage, 
this one, you have an M.I.? Have you had a history before? You take any medicine? No, 
okay, you get a green tag. And that's all it was. But as we started getting more towards it, 
it started getting more serious. Then when we got that guy, that guy saved my life too. 
That's the main thing I tell everybody. I might have saved his life, but he definitely saved 
me and my partners' life. That's what me and my partner say. It was just a blessing, you 
know? You know, that's it. That's all I got to say. Yeah, that's it. 

A: This concludes my interview with Paramedic Andre Cherrington. The time 

now is 1725 hours. 



File No. 9110037 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMT JUAN RIOS 
Interview Date: October 10, 2001 



JUAN RIOS 

CHRISTINE BASTEDENBECK:Today is October 10, 2001. The time is 1430 hours. 
My name is Christine Bastedenbeck. I work for the Fire Department of the City of New 
York. I'm conducting an interview at Battalion 31, EMS with the following individual... 

JUAN RIOS: EMT Juan Rios. 

Q: Please state your rank and where you're assigned. 

A: EMT, I'm assigned to Battalion 31, Unit 31 David, tour two. 

Q: Okay, Mr. Rios, just give us your account of the events of September 11 th . 

You were working that day? 

A: Yeah, I was working with my partner, David Blacksburn. We drove up, you 

know, every morning we go under the Brooklyn bridge and we, you know, we read our 
newspaper. In front of us, there was a medic unit from Long Island College, so, you know, 
they look and they saw a plane going into the World Trade Center. On the north side I 
think it was. Then they make a U-turn, they tell me and my partner, you know, a plane just 
went inside the World Trade Center, come on, let's go. So we were on the radio, and we're 
telling them, you know, we're going over there. So we went, we went on the Brooklyn 
Bridge. We saw, you know, the fire, smoke and everywhere people screaming. So we park 
on the South Side, on Liberty. 

Q: You parked your vehicle at...? 

A: At Liberty. 

Q: Liberty and what intersection? 

A: I think it was West End and Washington. 

Q: Okay. 

A: And then, when the second plane hit, debris started to fall down, so... 

Q: Okay, when you got there and stopped at Washington and Liberty, what 

was happening around you? 

A: People screaming, people just, it was total chaos. People were screaming, 

debris was falling, I looked up and I saw people just throwing themselves out of the 



JUAN RIOS 
buildings. They were landing on roofs. I heard they were landing on people, and it was 
just total chaos. 

Q: Okay, did you, when you got there, did you report to any supervisor or...? 

A: There was a Lieutenant, but I didn't. ..it was total chaos that everyone was 

just almost doing their own thing. But, I just saw one Lieutenant there. 

Q: Okay, did he approach you, or did you approach him? 

A: He approached us and we had a patient in back, and um... 

Q: Where did you get the patient from? 

A: She ran into us. She was having like, an anxiety attack. 

Q: Okay. 

A: So we gave her, you know, oxygen and shit. 

Q: That was from the World Trade Center? 

A: Yeah. So she, she just calmed down. She was on the bus, in the 

ambulance. Then when the second plane hit, the Lieutenant told us to go to Washington 
and Albany, which is around the corner. We parked with at least 20 ambulances. So we 
just went there, we were waiting for people to come so we could take them to the hospital, 
but nobody was coming. 

Q: Okay, what happened to the original patient that you had? 

A: When the second one hit, you know, we heard like a loud explosion and 

debris was coming down. Everyone was like get out, get out and she got scared, she ran 
out of the bus, and I don't know where she went. We moved the bus, and they told us to 
park them in two lines, at least ten ambulances in each line. I was in the back waiting, you 
know, so we could wait for patients and I was hooking up the regulator to the 0-2, when I 
hear people screaming and a loud explosion, and I heard like "sssssssss..." the dust like 
"sssssssss..." So I come out of the bus, and I look and I see a big cloud of dust and 
debris coming from the glass... through the condominium, the other building, and like, 
glass falling. So I just started to run, everybody ran, so I just ran. Our bus, it got totaled. 



JUAN RIOS 
Yeah, like broken windows, the back was full with debris and dust, other peoples' 
equipment, they wouldn't even know. So, I just ran to Battery Park with everybody. It was 
me, my partner, and another voluntary medic, and three or two cops. 

Q: Do you know any of their names? 

A: No, I don't know any of their names. 

Q: Just, the only person you knew was your partner? 

A: Yeah. So, we just ran, ran as far. ..you know, when the second one. ..we 

heard it, and more dust came. Not debris, just smoke. All we heard was "Ssssssss..." like 
a "Sssss" sound. We ran, we ran at least a mile away from the ferry. But there was two 
chiefs, I don't know their names? 

Q: Were they EMS chiefs? 

A: EMS chiefs. 

Q: Okay. 

A: Out of nowhere I seen an ambulance coming. A guy driving with two 

people in the back. The chief got on the radio asking for boats to come so we could take 
the people to Jersey City. Whoever had to be treated we treated on the ambulance. 
Another, I think it was like a, not an ambulance, but another like, van with supplies came 
over. They brought you know, oxygen, and a whole bunch of stuff. 

Q: Okay, was that a fire department vehicle? 

A: Yeah, afire department vehicle. 

Q: Was it in like an LSU or something? 

A: No, just EMS. 

Q: Okay, you don't know? Just a van with all kinds of equipment? 

A: Yeah, right, it came with a Lieutenant. Like two Lieutenants and... 

Q: And where was that? 



JUAN RIOS 

A: Battery Park. You know, we treated many people just with asthma. We 

gave them Albuterol, and we just put them on the boat to Jersey City. After we cleared 
that up, they had another sector in the ferry, there were a whole bunch of people there. 

Q: So basically you ended up at like a triage area in Battery Park? 

A: We made our own triage area in Battery Park. After we finished everything, 

we went to the ferry. 

Q: Okay, did you sustain any injuries that day? 

A: No, no. 

Q: Other than being totally covered in... 

A: Covered with um, dirt and... 

Q: Okay, you don't have asthma or anything? 

A: No, I don't have asthma. 

Q: Okay, so you ended up treating patients and...? 

A: There were a whole bunch of people who had, you know, the carts. They 

had water, ice cream, so they were generous enough to give us, they offered that we could 
take whatever we wanted to take. There were giving people water, soda, ice cream, 
pretzels, potato chips. They said, whatever you need just take from here. 

Q: At any time did you get separated from your partner? 

A: No. 

Q: Okay, anything else you want to add to your story? 

A: It was. ..I'm never gonna forget the experience, you know? I still think 

about it, cause I went back on Friday to do overtime. 

Q: This past Friday? 

A: Yeah, and I was in the same spot I was in when it happened. I saw the 

windows of the condominium, they were all damaged, you know. Say I just stood there, 
you never know what could have happened. You know I could just, you know, I could've 
died. So it just, it brought a lot of memories back, you know? You know, just the bus, in 



JUAN RIOS 
the back got totaled, other people's equipment in there covered with dust and all the 
broken glass. Cause I was debating should I stay in the back or just run? I saw everybody 
run, so I ran. I just started. You know, I started at the academy in December of 2000, I just 
came into the field in February. To have eight months on the job and to see this... 

Q: Yeah, something that you never want to see again, I'm sure. Okay Juan, 

thank you very much. This concludes the interview with EMT Juan Rios, the time now is 
1439 hours. 



File No. 9110038 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMT DANIEL WHITMAN 
Interview Date: October 10, 2001 



D. WHITMAN 

PAUL RADENBERG: The time is 1441 hours, and this is Paul Radenberg 
with the Fire Department, City of New York. I'm conducting an interview with... 

DANIEL WHITMAN: Dan Whitman, Battalion 31, shield number 5300, 
EMS FDNY. 

Q: Okay, Mr. Whitman is an Emergency Medical Technician. We are 

conducting this interview regarding the events of September 11,2001 at EMS 
Battalion 51. 

A: 31. 

Q: Correction, 31. Okay, start basically, with, you know, making your way 

down to the Trade Center. You were off duty? 

A: I was off duty, I made my way down to Ground Zero. I was directed by 

Police Officers and Traffic Officers to stop by the Battalion station, cause they 
wouldn't let me walk all the way down to Ground Zero originally. And I was 
down at the battalion station, I think it was on Warren Street. One of those cross 
streets by Ground Zero. They just had a plethora of people there. People from 
all over the Eastern Seaboard. They had medics from Connecticut and tons of 
people down there, there was lots of people there. I was directed to go to South 
Ferry. There at South Ferry, it had even more people with very little patience. I 
was down there for a significant amount of time. Then I was directed down to 
Ground Zero to treat people. There were firefighters right on site with saline and 
Visene for our eyes. And, I don't know, I spent about 15 hours there. 



D. WHITMAN 

Q: Okay, the first station that you stopped at, that was a temporary aid 

station? 
A: Yes. 

Q: When you were on your way down there, and that was somewhere around 

Warren Street, right? 

A: Warren Street, right. Warren Street if I recall. 

Q: Okay, do you remember who sent you from Warren Street to South Ferry? 

A: I couldn't tell you, all I know is that they outranked me. 

Q: Was it a fire officer, EMS? 

A: It was EMS. He was wearing a blue jacket, it looked like an EMS coat. So 

I guess it was EMS. 

Q: Okay, and then, when you got down to South Ferry, who sent you up from 

South Ferry? 

A: It's not that I was sent up, I couldn't go home anyway, so I got released 

there, and that's where I spent the majority of my time, at South Ferry. I signed 
off that I was leaving. I was going through, I got to Ground Zero, and there I was 
directed to treat the patients with Visene and saline, just to clear their eyes, the 
firefighters. 

Q: Who gave you that direction? Do you remember? 

A: Um, I think it was a doctor down there. There was a doctor down there, 



D. WHITMAN 

cause the firefighters were just coming up with the same thing, stuff in their eyes. 

So they just said we should have people down there, I talked to the medics down 

there, the army guys, I went down with them. The chief medical officer on scene 

told us all to go back. I don't know who he was. He was in a firefighter outfit. 

So after that I was on about my 15 th hour, I was getting tired. I walked all the 

way down from the Bronx to get there. That's about when I went home. 

Q: Do you remember seeing any EMS personnel that you recognized that had 

come in from home in civilian clothes, rather than in uniform? 

A: None that I can recall like that. The only one that I did see was Gary 

Smiley, that I know by name and face. He had a bunch of people in his 
ambulance with him who I could tell you who they were by face, but by name I 
couldn't really help you out. But Gary Smiley's the one I really know by name 
and face. 

Q: Okay, did, while you were down there, what point in the job do you 

remember getting down there? Were you down there between the plane impact 
and the towers coming down? 

A: As the tower was coming down, the second tower. 

Q: As the second tower came down? 

A: Yes, that's when I got down there. 

Q: Do you remember where you were down there when the second tower 

came down? 



D. WHITMAN 

A: I was a couple of blocks away. I was close enough for the cloud of smoke 

to come over me, but, I didn't really feel the direct debris. So three blocks maybe. 

Q: So, still north of the trade center? 

A: I think so. 

Q: Okay, and, you did say before when we were talking that you made your 

way down with a marine? 

A: Yes. From... there was an armory. And I heard over 1010 WINS that all 

military personnel report to the nearest armory. I'm in the military, so I went over 
there. And when I got there, that's when the second plane hit. I was released 
from there because it was a National Guard Unit, and I'm a Reserve Unit. So the 
Marine and I, we know each other, we decided to go down to Ground Zero, make 
our way down there. 

Q: You don't remember his name by chance? 

A: Uh, no. I can tell you what he looks like. Hahaha. 

Q: Okay, in your travel from the first aid station up on Warren Street, down 

to South Ferry, how did you make that trip? That was on foot or...? 

A: On foot, yeah. 

Q: It was walking? 

A: Yeah, actually walking, and maybe 3 or 4 blocks we got picked up by 

Long Island College, they have this ambulance they call the "Beast." It's just a 
really big ambulance and awkward looking. They picked us up for a couple 



D. WHITMAN 

blocks. Me, the Marine, a doctor, and 2 nurses. They picked us all up, cause we 
were all travelling down together. Then they took them down to South Ferry, and 
we got dropped off at the aid station on Warren. Around that area. So it's about 
two or three blocks. 

Q: Okay, so really other than Gary Smiley, no other EMS names that you 

recognize? 

A: The faces I recognize, not the names 

Q: Okay, any other thoughts or impressions on the job? Anything that makes 

it stand out? 

A: Well, an event that kind of stands out, it was weird to me for the Chief 

Medical Officer to tell me and the other people treating the firefighters on site 
when they were just walking up to get their eyes washed out, it's just a simple 
saline solution to wash their eyes out to continue working, for them to get sent all 
the way up there when you could have people on site. I don't know, he was under 
a lot of stress, I'm not knocking what he did, but that didn't make sense to me. It 
was a little chaotic, but we weren't prepared for a situation like this, there's 
nothing you can really say, but that would be my only thing. 
Q: Okay, just to clarify it a little bit, you were at the Warren Street station 

when the second tower came down? 
A: No, I was on my way to Warren Street. 



D. WHITMAN 

Q: You were on your way? Still on your way? 

A: Yeah, I was only a few blocks away and the smoke cloud came through. 

First I saw people running, and then I saw the cloud behind them. And that's 

when I started running. 

Q: Everybody was running... 

A: But it was, I don't know.. ..oh, another thing that I found odd about this, 

it's a sad comparison. ..but it was like a video game. Cause every once in awhile 

you'd walk a couple blocks, and on the corner, covered in debris and soot, if you 
didn't walk into it, there was supplies. Like you know, there was supplies, 
different stations, different areas, just sitting there. No one knew what they were. 
Like, pallets of water, but nobody knew they were there. You know? Nobody 
knew. You had to like, kick off the dirt, or pick up stuff. That's the only thing I 
found weird, that was kind of weird. Other than that, that's it I guess. 
A: Okay, the time is now 1450 hours, interview is concluded. 



File No. 9110039 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
PARAMEDIC GARY SMILEY 
Interview Date: October 10, 2001 



Transcribed by Elisabeth F. Nason 



G. SMILEY 

MR. TAMBASCO: Today is October 10. The time 
is 1435 hours. My name is Mike Tambasco. I'm an 
investigator assigned to the World Trade Center 
Task Force. I'm currently at EMS Battalion 31, 
conducting an interview with Paramedic Gary Smiley 
into the events of September 1 1 at the World Trade 
Center. 

Q. Gary, do me a favor. Give me your name, rank 
and the unit that you were on and then feel free. 

A. Gary Smiley, Paramedic, Battalion 31. That 
day I was working 31 Young Tour 2, 7 o'clock to 3:00. 
I heard the initial reports over the radio and we were 
assigned to the job. We were at Engine 207 at the time 
getting gas on over on Tillary Street. We started to 
respond. We went over the Brooklyn Bridge. From the 
Brooklyn Bridge you could already see the tower 
burning. It hit you in your mind that this was going 
to be bad. 

We initially responded in to lower Manhattan 
and ended up responding to Church Street in front of 5 
World Trade Center. The only reason I think that is 
because in 1993 when I responded to that bombing, 
that's where the initial staging was. 

When we pulled up there were two other 



G. SMILEY 

ambulances there that arrived simultaneously. I took 
command of those two and informed them to set up triage 
area across the street on the far side of Church, which 
from the map would be by St. Pauls cemetery. We got 
our equipment out. I started to give them direction. 
The helmets, coats and to get their equipment out. My 
partner Danny Rivera proceeded on the sidewalk towards 
the front of 5 World Trade Center because there were 
people coming out of the building that were hurt and 
they seemed to be milling around the front doors, so he 
was giving them instructions to get out of the building 
and to come off of the plaza and come across Church 
Street. 

Several people came out and they stumbled. 
He grabbed a couple. As I was coming across the 
street, across Church Street, is when the second plane 
hit the south tower, at that point we ran across the 
street going towards St. Pauls and there was a fire 
engine on the corner of that corner of Vesey. We hid 
behind the fire engine and we got hit with a lot of 
debris. 

It took I don't know how long for that to 
stop. I know it was hot because we all were - I 
remember Danny looking at me and saying you are like 



G. SMILEY 

red as a beet, because we probably got flash burns from 
the fireball. 

At that point there was everybody was running 
around crazy. A lot of people were coming up to us 
screaming and I didn't see that many people injured at 
that time. There was a lot of bodies, bodies came out 
of the sky at that point. In fact we were hit with 
debris, which turned out to be human remains. 

I remember a gentleman coming up to us with a 
leg screaming to help him. It wasn't his leg. It was 
somebody else's leg. We got back in the vehicles and 
we moved them up Vesey going towards Broadway. I 
pulled up on the sidewalk. There was like a Cabrini 
unit there and another EMS unit. 

At that point we started to get a lot of 
hysterical people, a lot of patients. I remember one 
patient going by us that was already dead that they had 
on the scoop, that the EMTs had stopped us and asked us 
and we had said that they were already dead. The guy 
was basically decapitated. 

At that point I made a decision. I told 
Danny I said, I think the best bet would be to go to 
West and Vesey, because that's where - that was the 
main staging area or the last one. So we thought that 



G. SMILEY 

would be a good idea, so we took the two units that 

were with us and came around Broadway down Vesey past 5 

and 6. 

There was a lot of debris in the street. 
There was a lot of burning debris in the street. I 
didn't see many people at that point. There wasn't 
anybody to stop and help. There was just a lot of 
emergency vehicles apparently coming down that way. We 
ended up - we pulled into Vesey and West. There 
seemed to be a lot of fire engines already staged 
there. We met up with Captain Pincus and Chief 
Goldfarb. 

We parked the truck. We were the second 
vehicle in off of West and Vesey. There was a Citywide 
ambulance that was the first one, catty corner to the 
second. Equipment was taken out and they had staged us 
in the front of 3 World Financial Center on the upper 
steps of it. There was other units on the lower steps, 
which was directly in front of 6 and off at the angle 
of the north tower. 

At that point a lot of people were just 
standing around, I remember Manny Delgado was there, 
Dr. Cherson, a number of volunteers came up to us 
asking if they could help. About six or seven EMTs. 



G. SMILEY 

They told me to start taking down names and numbers so 
I started taking down their names and their EMT numbers 
just to keep track of them. At that point nobody knew 
what was going on. 

There was about - I think there was 3 ALS 
units and 7 BLS units. Captain Pincus asked for a BLS 
and ALS unit that he could designate as fast units to 
go into the lobby. Me and Danny volunteered. Another 
BLS crew volunteered. They were just waiting for a 
final preparation to know when we were going to make it 
across the street. 

At that point, I met up with a couple of 
other guys from our Battalion who also came down to 
stage there. EMT Felton, Sean Cunniffe. I remember 
Felton because we started to notice people coming off 
the building, coming off the north tower and at first 
we didn't know what was going on, and then you could 
see that they were jumping. In fact I had to actually 
hold Felton because he wanted to run across the street 
and catch them. He wanted - he was hysterical and he 
just wanted to catch them. I told him that he couldn't 
do that. They were hitting the ground, of course, 
exploding. It was horrible. We must have -we 
probably saw about a dozen people jump. 



G. SMILEY 

At that point they took everybody's - 
several people coming around taking everybody's name 
and badge numbers and what units they were, so they 
knew who was there. There were a slew of vehicles 
coming in that had already arrived on West Street, 
private ambulances, our units, proprietary units. 

Then we went back. We had gone down to the 
bottom steps and they went back up the top steps. We 
were standing by the stretcher. In fact, I think 
because they were getting ready to send me and Danny in 
to the forward triage area when the first tower, which 
would be the south tower, somebody yelled it was 
collapsing. 

We ran up the steps and into the AMEX 
building, which would be 3 World Financial Center. All 
the equipment was left, we just dropped everything and 
we ran. Debris came down, but from that tower, the 
lobby held, at least the windows held. We were covered 
with debris but we were in the lobby. Then we heard 
pounding on the glass for some of the guys that didn't 
make it in the lobby, so we broke out the windows to 
the front of 3, American Express building. We got 
those guys into the lobby. 

Chief Carrasquillo was there too. He ended 



G. SMILEY 

up - he started taking a head count and he told me to 
take a head count. There was a lot of people running 
around that had really - they were losing it. It was 
very understandable. 

I grabbed as much equipment as I could from 
the outside and a couple of the other guys and we set 
up in the back part of the lobby, BLS on one side and 
ALS on the other side, figuring that we would be 
getting a lot of patients. The air was not too bad in 
there, and that's what we basically did. We figured we 
would get a large influx of people coming in at that 
point. Nobody started coming in. 

At that point Chief Goldfarb said that he 
smelled gas. Nobody smelled gas except Chief 
Goldfarb. Chief Goldfarb smelling gas saved about 40 
people, because we moved through the back lobby and out 
the side entrance on to the farther end of Vesey Street 
going towards North End Avenue. 

That's when we started to hear the radio 
transmissions of Maydays. On our radios we heard EMS 
Mayday. I knew over Chief Carrasquillo's radio I was 
hearing FD Maydays. This went on for 5 minutes 
straight. We heard the units calling, we heard our 
units, we heard 1 Mary, 6 Mary, 6 Adam. 



G. SMILEY 

We asked Captain Pincus about after 5 
minutes, we said what are we going to do here. He said 
I can't force you to go. We said well, we want to go. 
So me, Danny and another medic who works for us but he 
was working for New York Hospital that day. I don't 
know his last name. He works at New York, Carlos. 

Q. Do you remember, his first name is Carlos? 

A. Yes. He said if you want to go find these 
guys, we can. It didn't seem like at that point there 
was really, besides our group, there was nobody else 
there, at least that was alive. So we took trauma bags 
and started off and our scoop stretchers off and 
started off walking back down Vesey and we made the 
turn on to West Street. We passed the building with 
the 3, American Express building. 

I remember seeing in front of the collapse 
unit for Rescue 3 there were 3 Battalion Chiefs that 
were there and I asked the Battalion Chief, did you see 
any of the guys. I said we can't see anybody. We 
don't know where they are calling for help for. That 
was the only firemen I saw. I didn't see anybody 
else. I don't know how far down, we didn't get too 
much farther down West Street luckily. 

Q. Going south? 



10 
G. SMILEY 



A. South, going towards the north pedestrian 
bridge, when you heard a rumble. That's when you 
looked up and you saw the second tower coming down. 
There was no communication at that point. It was - I 
just remember turning and running. I know Danny, we 
eventually found out where everybody ran to, the 3 of 
us. But I never saw the two other Battalion Chiefs 
again. I know my partner ended up dragging the one 
that was alive out. 

I ended up running back up the steps towards 
3. I made it right to the corner and got knocked down 
by the blast. I guess it was the gush of wind. I got 
hit in the back with some cement and I had just made it 
around the first ambulance and I dove under my truck, 
which was vehicle 305. That's what a little voice in 
my head told me to do. I crawled underneath the 
ambulance and that's where I was for about the next 15 
minutes. I remember a lot of debris hitting the truck 
and I couldn't breathe and I couldn't see. 

I don't know how long that went on for. When 
it sounded as if the debris stopped, I couldn't - the 
sides were already covered as if it had snowed, so I 
started to dig and I cleared enough away that I could 
see a glow, which I knew was not - which was fire, 



11 

G. SMILEY 



because there was fires burning around the vehicles. 
So I decided it was better to get out and try and make 
it than burn to death. 

So I crawled out from under there and you 
couldn't see still. I just remembered the same side of 
the truck I came out of, so I figured if I point myself 
in the direction I will be going away from the towers. 
So I just started crawling and I got up and I started 
walking. You still couldn't see. It was as if you had 
your head in a sack. I couldn't breathe, I couldn't 
see. 

I tried calling for Danny. Every time I took 
a deep breath it was just worse. At that point I had 
dropped the lantern I had. The equipment was gone. I 
wasn't concerned too much about that. I didn't notice 
at the time that I had injuries to my leg and stuff 
like that. I just tried - my only thought at that 
point was to get out of there. 

I ended up walking across Vesey into a 
construction area that is in between North End Avenue 
and the West Side Highway. I found a chain link fence 
that I bumped into that I decided let me follow the 
fence and see where it goes. At least I can hold on to 
something. I was going to climb over the fence and 



12 
G. SMILEY 



decided just go alongside it. I went alongside the 
fence for a while. It seemed like forever. 

Then I encountered a fireman who was also 
disoriented. I don't know who he is. I don't remember 
his name. I don't remember what company. We walked 
together along the fence. We still couldn't see. We 
made it around the side of the fence, then we started 
hearing voices calling, anybody out there. We started 
- we just followed the natural turn of the fence and 
we ended up from what they tell me somewhere near North 
End Avenue there was a salad bar that was across from 4 
Merrill Lynch -the Merrill Lynch building and there 
was about seven or eight cops in there, Port Authority 
guys, a couple of firemen. 

The owner and his daughter or his wife, they 
dragged us in there. Everybody - the cloud was 
clearing a little, but there was a lot of fire around 
there. The parked cars that had been parked there were 
all on fire and which wasn't on fire was exploding. We 
didn't know at that point. I know that one of the 
police officers said that he thought that they were 
bombs and maybe they rigged them to blow up. Just 
secondary explosions. We didn't know what to do. 

We went towards the back of the restaurant, 



13 
G. SMILEY 



there was a couple of firemen got in there. One 
fireman yelling let's get the gas off. So he went into 
the kitchen area and they killed the gas. They had a 
couple of hoses that had these big industrial sinks, so 
we started hosing each other off because the stuff was 
burning you. I guess it was just because the ash was 
so hot. 

Stayed in there for about 20 minutes. The 
explosions outside were too much, so we decided to get 
out of there and we ended up coming out of there and we 
ended up on North End Avenue. They had set up a field 
hospital in I don't know what building. They dragged 
us in there for a while. Then there was a report of a 
gas leak in there so I decided it would be better if I 
exit. There were people that were getting treated. 
They could walk, basically ran out of there. Everybody 
ran out of there. 

It must have been about 50 of us at that 
point. People started saying let's get some of the 
vehicles, you know. We had thought at that point that 
we need something to get out of there. So Emergency 
Services, I know there was about six or seven ESU cops 
and they basically told us that they are going to stay 
in front of us and I don't know what they thought. I 



14 
G. SMILEY 



think they kind of thought that there were ground 
troops coming in to kill us next. At least that seemed 
to be - they were going to keep us from whatever was 
coming. It was crazy, people thought that there was - 
they were going to bomb everything. 

People were running around. FBI people 
saying that there were bombs in different parks and 
just running from one area to the next. I remember 
seeing Captain Rivera there from Manhattan - from the 
Bronx. He is now in Queens, who I remember we got to 
the point where we were actually running out of places 
to go. We were going to go into the water. I said 
maybe we should take off our stuff and go into the 
ocean. We didn't know where else to go. 

Because there was, every building was 
apparently - the police said there was gas leaks and 
they said they were going to blow up and we had no 
place else to go. Somebody actually - a couple of 
guys ran back down Vesey and got into some of the 
vehicles, because mine had pulled up. We had about 
seven or eight ambulances at that point and a couple of 
Emergency Services cars. 

Basically we didn't do much for a little 
while. There was not much to do. We were kind of 



15 
G. SMILEY 



trapped back there. We couldn't get out. I don't 

remember how we actually got out of there and who 

directed us to get out of there. We ended up - I 

don't know how we ended up -we ended up on Greenwich 

Street I guess, like an hour later. About 7 units 

ended up on Greenwich and Duane and I remember meeting 

Captain, no, Chief Wells there. He asked me was the 

Lieutenant with us. I said no, he told me I was a 

senior guy and he was going to take over that area so 

we set up on Greenwich Street. 

They had about 5 or 6 doctors and they had 
about 6 ambulances. We spent the better part of I 
think 6 or 7 hours there doing absolutely nothing until 
7 collapsed. We still did nothing because there was no 
patients. Everybody is still - there is a lot of 
trouble breathing. You just kind of ignored it. I 
knew my leg was bleeding, I had some pretty big cuts on 
my leg, but I really didn't - I just bandaged it up. 
I don't think - you kind of knew that there was - you 
were going to be needed. They said that a lot of 
people were dead so we didn't even know how many were 
left. 

From there we were asked to respond to the 
Millennium Hotel later on in the nighttime by 



16 
G. SMILEY 



Lieutenant Jack Sullivan. One of the volunteers said 
that they had reports of patients that they found in 
the Millennium. So we volunteered to go there, so we 
took the truck around to the Millennium. I remember 
were driving through the streets, seeing Chief Gombo 
walking with Russ Terranova and we continued going down 
towards the Millennium. Ended up not finding anybody 
at the Millennium. 

We brought our trucks around to One Liberty 
Plaza. We worked there for the next 5 or 6 hours until 
we were relieved at about 2:00 in the morning. We 
worked inside that field hospital just taking care of 
what was coming in. 

Throughout the night you couldn't see. You 
had to wash your eyes out every 5 to 10 minutes. It 
was pretty blinding. I guess the adrenaline kept going 
through the whole time, because even at Liberty Plaza 
there were several times when you just saw the whole 
block start running. Everybody -we must have ran up 
and down that street 5 or 6 times because stuff was 
coming off the buildings and there were more 
collapses. 

It wasn't till I got released and starting 
coming back, I guess when we started to like settle 



17 
G. SMILEY 



down a little bit. By the time I got back to Brooklyn, 
I couldn't breathe at all. That's when they took me 
over to Long Island College Hospital. I was admitted 
for severe respiratory distress, severe smoke 
inhalation. I had developed (inaudible). They said 
not so much from being trapped but from the severe 
dehydration from the dust. I guess from the heat, 
because it was so hot and you didn't take your turnout 
coat off and your helmet didn't come off your head, 
because you were afraid you were going to get hit with 
something. 

I was admitted there and I spent up until 
Friday in the hospital. I was released. That's about 
it. I went back down Friday night on my own time to 
dig with some guys from New York Hospital, because I 
just felt that I needed to pitch in and see what there 
was. That about covers the events the way it was. 

Q. Gary, unless there is anything else you can 
think of or want to add to it - 

A. Just looking at the questions and stuff, I 
don't think anybody was intentionally put in any harm's 
way. There was a lot of volunteers coming up to you, 
some that I never saw again. I hope to God they didn't 
get killed, but it seems as if there was a tremendous 



18 
G. SMILEY 



amount of EMTs that were coming out of nowhere. Not 
our people, just volunteer EMTs. I don't know what 
happened to them. 

There was no warning when the buildings came 
down. Even after the first collapse you really didn't 
even have an inclination that the second tower was 
going to come down. I don't think anybody was aware. 
The immediate people that I was with during the 
collapse, you know, I met up with Danny about half an 
hour, 45 minutes later. More like an hour later. 

Danny had hid in the corner of the AMEX 
building and wedged himself in by one of the window 
ledges and he flattened himself out and he found some 
stretchers and put them on top of himself. That's what 
cushioned the debris from killing him. 

That was it. I know the other medic that was 
with us got out as well. He ended up running into the 
lobby and continued in the lobby, because the lobby was 
crushed. That's what I said before about Goldfarb and 
the smell of gas. Because from what I have seen of the 
building, we wouldn't fare too well staying in that 
lobby. We probably would have all been crushed. 

I didn't see anybody that was missing, that 
are still missing. I guess that about covers it for 



19 
G. SMILEY 



now. I'm sure if you ask me tomorrow I would have 
about 500 more things to say. I'm sure you don't want 
to have a dissertation on my state of mind. I won't 
give it to you. 

Q. All right, if there is anything else that you 
want to add later on, that's not a problem. We will 
get it in there. 

A. You know, it was just the thing that struck 
us as strange when we first pulled up was the small 
amount of people that were coming out of the building. 
Remember in '93 when we pulled up into the same spot 
there was a thousand people coming out of that 
building. When we pulled out there was maybe 100. 
They were milling in the lobby. I remember we had to 
scream at them to get out of the lobby and to come 
across the street. 

There were a lot of people who finally 
listened to us. Thank God, because I'm sure they are 
still alive today because of that. That was one of the 
things that really stood out. Where are they? Then of 
course, after the first one collapsed, it was basically 
nobody was around. You know, I think everybody you 
know that was in my immediate group, everybody really 
stuck together and I got to give them a lot of credit. 



20 
G. SMILEY 



I give Goldfarb, Carrasquillo, and Jace Pincus, Captain 
Pincus, a lot of credit. They kept their heads pretty 
well. Nothing on their part endangered us at all. 
Everything that we did we volunteered to do. 

I'm sure they were - you know, they were 
acting in good faith. Timing was very good for them. 
It was basically the only thing that stood in the way 
of us getting killed. Just a couple of minutes. 

So that was about it. 

MR. TAMBASCO: I thank you. The interview is 
concluding at 1503 hours. Thanks again. 



File No. 9110040 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMT ALAN COOKE 
Interview Date: October 10, 2001 



Transcribed by Elisabeth F. Nason 



A. COOKE 

MR. TAMBASCO: Today is October 10, 2001. My 
name is Mike Tambasco, assigned to the World Trade 
Center Task Force, conducting an interview of the 
events of September 11 at the World Trade Center. 
We are interviewing EMT Alan Cooke of Battalion 31 
of the EMS. The starting time for this interview 
is 1737 hours. 

Q. Mr. Cooke, I will just ask you to give me 
your rank and your assignment on that day and feel free 
to go right ahead. 

A. My name is Alan Cooke, EMT D. I was working 
32 Adam Tour 2. Initially what I remember or how it 
started is when I first came into work I saw the smoke 
when I was walking into the station. I really didn't 
pay any mind as to what it may have been. Somebody 
told me a plane crashed into the World Trade Center, so 
I thought it was a small engine plane. When I get to 
the parking lot and I saw the first tower burning. 

Then while I was standing in the parking lot, 
that's when I saw the plane crash into the second 
tower. So my partner and I, Victor Camile, we got our 
equipment together, got the bus checked out and we were 
assigned to 333 Rector Street for an asthmatic. That's 
how we ended up going into Manhattan. 



A. COOKE 

Went into Manhattan. We encountered heavy 
traffic, which really delayed our response time getting 
to Rector Street. 

Q. How did you go, over the bridge? 

A. We went over the Brooklyn Bridge, which was 
closed off at that time. We got flagged down by a fire 
Lieutenant so that he could get over the bridge with 
us. We stopped. He got on. We took him over the 
bridge. We dropped him off at the foot of the bridge 
and then went down by Water Street because that's the 
only way I know to get to the west side. We didn't 
know exactly what was going on at that time. 

Like I said it was heavy traffic. I think we 
left on that job about 9:30, had to be. We were 
fighting traffic and by the time we got down there I 
had no idea what time it was. I asked one of the 
officers where Rector Street was. She directed us past 
Rector Street because, you know, she was sending us to 
the staging. I guess by that time that's when they had 
all the injuries from the second. 

We must have made it to as far as maybe 
Cedar. 

Q. Coming up from the south? 

A. Yes, coming from the south, heading north on 



A. COOKE 

the West Side Highway. At that time, we stopped and 
that's when I heard the rumble. I a heard a rumble. 
Both of us looked up and we saw a part of the 
building. I saw a part of the building coming down. I 
had thought it was just one piece of the building 
coming down. I didn't in my imagination didn't think 
it was the entire building coming down. And my 
partner, I guess she realized it before I did. She 
told me to drive, kept yelling drive, drive. I just 
yelled back drive where, because I couldn't go 
forward. That's where everything is happening. 
Couldn't go back because of the congestion from the 
crowd. 

So somehow I made a U turn. I don't know 
how. I made the U turn. I drove down the west side 
and I went to go under the overpass. There is a little 
underpass. 

Q. The tunnel underpass that goes around? 

A. Right. I figured if we stopped there we 
would be all right. But then I said well, I don't know 
what's happening. We might get trapped in there. 
Anyway, on the way in that direction going back south, 
I looked in my rearview mirror and that's when you saw 
everything coming down. All you saw were people 



A. COOKE 

running. 

I remember this one cop, she stands out in my 
mind. One dark little heavy cop running, but you know 
how you just saw the ball of flame and dirt and 
everything. It just engulfed everybody. So we drove. 
I kept telling my partner we got to go back, because I 
knew there had to be people hurt. 

We got to the beginning of the FDR Drive, by 
the ferry, and I guess because of the way the streets 
channel everything, one of the fire balls or whatever, 
had to have made it as far as the South Street Seaport, 
because what happened at that time, it seemed like an 
explosion was coming from there. I thought an 
explosion was coming from there. That's when everybody 
started running towards us from the Seaport. 

Now we had everybody running us from the 
Seaport and running to us from the west side, so we 
couldn't go either way. That's when all the ash and 
everything started coming. We had a couple of people 
stop us because they were complaining of chest pain. 

Q. At that point you were like what, down by 
where the ferry is? 

A. We were down by the ferry at that time. We 
had a couple of people stop us complaining about chest 



6 
A. COOKE 



pain, asthma, couple of pregnant people, mostly about 2 
or 3 couples were throwing their kids at us, they 
wanted to get the kids inside. Nobody could breathe 
and everybody was trying to climb up on to the wall of 
the FDR Drive. 

This guy fell off the wall and hit the back 
of his head, so they were calling me for that, so we 
are trying to treat one woman with chest pain and one 
woman, she was saying her stomach hurt and she is 
pregnant and then I would have to go immobilize the guy 
off the wall, who fell off the wall, and the thing I 
remember most is when it got dark, when everything just 
clouded. 

I knew at that time there weren't supposed to 
be any planes flying, but I heard planes flying and at 
that point I thought I was going to die. I really 
did. I thought what happened was that there was an 
explosion at the World Trade Center. Then I thought 
there was another one at the Seaport. I thought that 
was a secondary and herding everybody towards the 
Brooklyn Bridge, because everybody was asking me where 
should we go, where should we go. I just told them to 
get on the highway and head north or towards Brooklyn. 

Now I'm thinking maybe everybody is heading 



A. COOKE 

towards the bridge and now here comes even another 
plane or a rocket or something to take out the bridge. 

Luckily it didn't happen. We treated as many 
people as we could. Like I said, I immobilized the guy 
who fell off the wall. We got him to Beekman. I have 
no idea what time it was. 

Q. You were able to transport him in your bus? 

A. Yes, we transported about 5 adults and 3 
kids. I don't know how we had them situated, but we 
got everybody to Beekman and as soon as I pulled up to 
Beekman, going the route that I took, is when I noticed 
the other, that's when the second tower collapsed. 
Everything was coming at us as we were trying to get to 
Beekman. 

Q. You were going up, I guess Water Street 
there? 

A. Yes. So we finally made it. We got to 
Beekman and that's when the cloud and everything was 
coming towards Beekman. By the time we got all of our 
patients out we just stopped and helped get everybody 
in that all the ambulances were pulling up. Beekman 
needed somebody with a head injury transported to 
Bellevue, so we transported that gentleman to 
Bellevue. He didn't make it. 



A. COOKE 

Q. That wasn't the same patient that you - 

A. No, it wasn't - I don't know whatever 
happened to him. We took the head injury to Bellevue. 
We were BBP, so what we did was we went to the old 
Bellevue station, just exchanged equipment and went 
back up to Ground Zero. 

There we encountered a few more people, took 
them back to Beekman, then we went back up to Ground 
Zero. 

Q. Over, where on the west side now when you 
went back? 

A. Yes. It was like just driving you are going 
to find somebody. We went back up and that's basically 
when things were more or less in order. Like I said, I 
had no frame. I had no idea what time it was during 
all this. That's when they set up the triage at the 
terminal, the ferry terminal. 

Q. Down by the Staten Island Ferry? 

A. Right, and they wanted the ambulance staged 
in a certain way. I'm going to say I didn't like where 
they wanted us staged, because it was like an alley, so 
if one vehicle went down you couldn't get the other 
vehicles out, so we staged on the corner. 

During that time we went back up to Ground 



9 
A. COOKE 



Zero to see if we could help out there. All you saw 
was, you know, what was left of the vehicles and 
quiet. It was like a snow storm. There was nothing we 
could do at that time. We were released from the 
scene. We came back. Oh, wait, while we were down 
there staging, you ran into a lot of co-workers. 

I mean it was just unbelievable the way we 
all greeted each other like we knew how lucky we was. 

Q. Happy to see each other? 

A. Yes, I didn't - we went to the front and saw 
like two or three ambulances were completely 
demolished. I ran into one of my co-workers who had 
got out just in time. You know, at the end of the day 

Q. Who was it? 

A. Jackson. Chris Jackson, I think his name 
is. Then I saw I can't remember the people's name, 
Maria, she was there. 

Q. Maria? 

A. Maria, what is her name. I can't think of 
her name. I can't think of her name. She works 32 
Boy. They were covered. She just looked like a big 
snowman. So I mean it was fast moving and slowest 
moving - slow moving at the same time. 



10 
A. COOKE 



We weren't there when the initial impact, but 
we got there right before the first tower collapsed. 
That's about it. We were released from the scene. 
Came in and luckily they allowed us to go home because 
we were so covered with everything, you know, 
fiberglass and whatever else was in there. 
That's about the end of my story. 

Q. Okay. Anything else that you want to add to 
it, any feelings, anything at all? Up to you. 

A. Well, as far as feelings are concerned I 
appreciate the way the whole company handled the 
personnel. I just think a lot of people don't realize 
what we, EMS, went through. I'm quite sure you have 
heard that a lot. You know, fire, we might have a lot 
of people, the Fire Department lost a lot of people, 
Port Authority lost, but, you know, as far as EMS, I 
don't think we were recognized as far as our presence 
on the scene, you know. Besides that, nothing. 

I wasn't too happy with the fact that the 
vehicles were staged around the World Trade Center, 
especially after the second plane hit. 

MR. TAMBASCO: All right Alan, thank you for 

your interview and the information, and I just - 

we will conclude this interview at 1749 hours. 



File No. 9110041 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMT JARJEAN FELTON 
Interview Date: October 10, 2001 



J. FELTON 

PAUL RADENBERG: The date is October 1 0, 200 1 . The time is 1 6 1 1 

hours. This is Paul Radenberg of the Fire Department of the City of New York. I'm 
conducting an interview with Jarjean Felton, EMT at Battalion 3 1 . EMS Battalion 3 1 . 
The Fire Department of the City of New York. We are currently at EMS battalion 3 1 . 
The interview is regarding the events of September 11, 2001 . Why don't you start with 
when you were assigned to the job. 

JARJEAN FELTON: It all started, I mean, me and my partner, we was 

getting breakfast. 

Q: Who were you working with? 

A: Sean Cuniffe, 48 David, tour two. Me and Cuniffe, we was getting 
breakfast right here on Fulton Street, Fulton and Flatbush and I'm not sure if there was 
already a unit down there when the first plane hit, I'm not sure. We just heard them 
arguing, or saying help, a plane hit this and that, the World Trade tower. So we asked 
him to put us on that job cause we heard them calling I guess 3 1 Adam from our same 
battalion on the job. So we told them, we told the dispatcher to put 48 David on. We 
asked to be put on the job, I would say like, we was one of the first 5 units put on the job. 
Cause if you go over the MR you see 48 David tour 2. We was one of the first units put 
on the job. This was after the first plane hit, so we're going across the Brooklyn Bridge. 
We see the fire, we see the hole in there. We're just thinking holy, man, what happened? 
You know what I'm saying? So we get down there. . . 

Q: When you came over the bridge. . . 



J. FELTON 

A: We came over the bridge, they had everything blocked off. It was like a 
motorcade, we just followed all the, I don't know, they was unmarked cars. So I assume 
the Fire Department, the Feds. We just followed them onto the Brooklyn Bridge and 
down there. We came down, I think we came down Chambers. No, not Chambers. We 
came down one of these streets, I would say Fulton. Came down, we went up Vesey 
Street. I would say Berkley Street on the Westside Highway. They had a triage right in 
front, I guess on Church Street. I had wanted to go there, but Sean was like "no, no, lets 
go behind like where they assigned us to", cause it was 2 units there. It was a medic and 
3 1 David. I'm not sure of the medic, but it was 3 1 David. They're another unit assigned 
to our station. So I had wanted to go down there, because I knew the guys, so I wanted to 
give them some support. But he was like, come on, let's go to the back. We went to the 
back, Vesey Street and Westside Highway. That's exactly where our triage was at. We 
parked our vehicle right here on Vesey Street. It was a Lieutenant right here taking our 
keys. 

Q: Did you recognize that Lieutenant? 

A: No, cause I've only been here like a year. So I don't know all the 
Lieutenants. 

Q: Right. 

A: My partner said he knew him. We gave the Lieutenant our keys like we 
normally do when you go to set up triage, I guess all the ambulance parked right here. It 



J. FELTON 

was ambulances, it was fire trucks, it was everything right here on Westside Highway. It 
was voluntaries— I seen Fire Patrol. That's where I seen Von Essen, right there on 
Westside Highway and Vesey Street, right there. We was right here on the Westside, by 
the American Express Building where they got the make-shift morgue now, he was right 
under here. This foot bridge. 

Q: The pedestrian overpass? 

A: The pedestrian overpass. This was probably like, 9. Cause I looked at 
that MR, the first unit was there at like 8:55. So I would say this was like 9, 10 I would 
say. I'm not sure the time. 

Q: Okay. 

A: Give or take a couple minutes, I'm not sure the time. We was there, I 
would say at least 15 or 10 minutes. There was people jumping, we observed firefighters 
going in, we observed ESU getting on their Scott Packs, going into buildings and all that. 
I would say right around that time while we were right under here, under the Westside 
Highway and pedestrian bridge, I seen a second plane coming. I'm thinking isn't that 
plane too low? I'm like. . .then I noticed, I seen it turn. It turned and went right in the 
building. But we're behind, like this is the building, it went in, and you see the explosion 
in the front... 

Q: On the other side than you? 

A: Yeah we see. . . and I said oh my god, I just sat there with my mouth open 
like Oh My god, Oh My God. I'm sitting there like Oh My God, and everyone's just 



J. FELTON 

running. But I'm like, why are we running it's on the Church side that all that debris and 
stuff was from, we was on the Westside Highway so, after that they told us to get along 
this, it was like this little, like a little sidewalk with grass and all that. They told us to 
move all of our equipment. We had unloaded our bus, we had long board, we had our 
stretcher, we had our de-fib. We had all our stuff out. We had our jackets and our 
helmets on. So they told us to move right here along the sidewalk. So after that, after the 
second plane they told us to move up, cause we was originally in the street. The told us 
to move after the second plane. Then, five minutes later. . . 

Q: You had to move back towards the water? 

A: No, they had us move like, towards the building more. 

Q: Okay. 

A: Cause we was in the street, we was in the street, then they told us to move 
towards the building more. Then eventually we ended up in the building lobby. 

Q: In the American Express Building? 

A: In the American Express Building. We ended up in the lobby. We're in 
the lobby, they gave us orders to go into the lobby, take all our equipment, whatever into 
the lobby because the second plane had just hit. There's people jumping, I at least 
counted more than... I didn't count, but at least, a minimum of 50 people jumping. I seen 
a minimum of 50 people jump, couples holding hands. But I was just so like, Oh My 
God. I've never seen nothing like that, cause I've only been here a year. I've never seen 
nothing like that. So we're in the building, we're in the American Express Building right 



J. FELTON 

here, we're in there, so we got all our equipment, all the EMS personnel. There's a lot of 
people in there. 

Q: Right. 

A: The Lieutenant told us to take all our equipment and go in there. So I go 
in there, I try to use my cell phone to let my family and friends know what's going on, 
tell them if they're coming to the city, no, don't come to the city. Let my fiance know 
that I'm alright. So I'm on the phone, then I just hear a commotion of people screaming 
like "Ahhhhhhhhhh. . ." My girlfriends like what's going on? What's going on? I'm like, 
I don't know, I gotta go. So I just dropped the phone and as. . .this building is like glass, 
made of glass. 

Q: Right. 

A: So, that time I just dropped the phone and I run, I see tower number 2 
coming down. I jumped over the fence in that building. 

Q: Yeah. 

A: I jumped over a fence coming down. The glass. . .there was another fence 
that I couldn't jump over cause it had spikes. I mean, it had the gate with spikes. I was 
like, man, I'm not hurting myself. So I went around, and as I went around I'm sitting and 
watching the building come down. I'm watching the building coming down, and I'm 
standing there right in front of these guys, but I'm not really, I'm just shocked like, I 
guess, me and my partner we're in this building. We're in there with 3 1 Adam, a couple 
of units from our station. The building's coming down, and I see it, I just stop. I'm just 



J. FELTON 

sitting there watching it come down. Sitting in front of all of these guys. Then I just hear 
somebody call my name "Felton, Felton, come on!" So I just wake up, like out of my 
trance, like, oh no, and I just start running. We ran right out the door. It's like. PD, a lot 
of civilians was there too. So PD, they propped the door open, we run out the back of the 
American Express Building. So we're like right here, the building's coming down, so it's 
the smoke that's chasing you now. So we ran up this way , we ran up Vesey to the north 
end. Then they told us to park our vehicles here, on the North end and set up another 
triage. I notice there's like one or two vehicles left here, 407 was left here cause it 
wouldn't start. We had EMT Jackson with us, he's 3 1 A. He's the person who just called 
me and woke me up. So we had him on our bus, drove it right here to the North End, 
right behind Vesey and North End. So we're right here. The Merv is right here, all of 
EMS. A lot of — Fire Department. A lot of department vehicles, ESU, but it was still 
vehicles like haz-tac units, I seen the haz-tac units, I seen the guys with like the tinfoil 
suits. I seen a lot of fire trucks left there when the second building came down. The 
smoke, all the rubble, everything, we have on the masks now. Me, like me and my 
partner, we just jumped in, we parked right there. So I went down, I went back down. I 
don't know what made me go right down. I go back down, I'm like, oh man, oh damn, 
it's like. . I still see some people there, but at that time I don't know what possessed me to 
go back down. I go back down it's like stuff, debris is all over the place. So I go back 
down to take a look then I just come back up like Yo, it's crazy. We were right here, I'm 
not really sure what time it is. I'm really not sure what time it is, cause I'm not worried 



J. FELTON 

about that. I wasn't worried about the time. I looked for my partner, they was like 
"Make sure you have your partner, you two stay together." Cause they was stressing that. 
"Make sure your partner is with you at all times." So, we were together. After that I 
don't know what happened. I really don't know what's going on. Really, I'm not really 
sure what's going on. By that time it was, one was still on fire, that was the last one hit, 
but that was the first one to come down. I would say like, right when I got back to Vesey 
and North, that's when one came down. At that time, I just left my vehicle and 
everybody's just running up North End Avenue. Whatever avenue it is, everyone is 

running up. I remember seeing we're all running, running like There's a little park 

here, we're running alongside there. I seen firemen, I seen everybody. I seen all types of 
equipment laying down on the ground, I seen Scott Packs making that noise. 

Q: The alarm? 

A: Yeah, the alarm for like say, somebody got knocked out and they're laying 
motionless. That alarm is going off. I just heard that, you just seen a whole bunch of 
equipment all over the place. Everybody just ran, everybody was just running like, yo. . . 
so we're along this, we're in the park, we're over here. The first building came down, 
everybody's like yo. Me and my partner's running together. Then I just turned back and 
looked like, Oh man. I'm not sure where the hell we went, but I know we was covered 
with dust after the first one came down. Everyone was like, Oh man. I seen firefighters - 
— there's still people in there. It's total chaos at this point, total chaos cause nobody 



J. FELTON 

would have expected those buildings to come down. It's total chaos, and I noticed that 
when tower one comes down, that's when the glass in the American Express building 
breaks. So we're all over here, somehow I go back to get my vehicle. I don't know what 
possessed me, cause it's right here. I went back, got my vehicle, picked up my partner. 
We're just like driving around. He's calling his family letting them know that he's 
alright. Somehow we made it to Chambers, to the high school. The high school that they 
just took over. 

Q: Right, Stuyvesant? 

A: Stuyvesant High School, they just took over. That's where we got 
separated. Cause we had a patient there. We had a patient. He was the driver, I was the 
tech. We had a patient, we had 2 patients basically. We had an ESU guy who said he 
just made it out the building. He was alright, he wasn't really worried about his injuries. 
He was just like, I gotta go back in there, I gotta go get my guys. He was just worried 
about going to get his guys. He said yo, I lost my guys and this and that. I don't 
remember his name, but I remember him, because he was on the news like a day or two 
later saying that he just made it out. ESU, I'm not sure, maybe he's a sargent, I'm not 
sure. But I remember seeing him on the news saying that. I was like, wow, that was one 
of my patients. It was him and another civilian contractor. He was having an MI, but he 
didn't know. So a medic jumped on, hooked him up to an EKG. Like yo, you having an 
MI. So I took off my jacket, I had my helmet still with me. My partner was like, we're 
gonna take him to the hospital. I was like you got a medic here, so I'm alright, I'm 



10 
J. FELTON 

alright. I'll just go back to the command and just chill out there at Stuyvesant High 
School. At that time, there was people just raping our bus, just taking all our stuff, like 
oxygen, taking everything they can get their hands on. Like, we're just gonna take your 
bus and just, there's a lot of patients and you ain't gonna need all this. It's a restocking 
station at Bellvue, so just re-stock then come back. So that's basically, I mean, I stayed 
there the whole time. I was really — cause I didn't know what to think. When I got to 
Stuyvesant High School, I was like dang, I know there's still people in that building. 
Cause I seen a lot of people running in the building the time we showed up. Getting in 
Scott Packs and running in the building. So I know there's people in there, I know 
there's like, man, nobody would have ever thought them buildings would come down. 
I'm just sitting there in amazement , the New York City skyline is just depleted now with 
these two buildings gone. I basically stayed on Chambers. I mean, the only thing that 
really had me frustrated was they wasn't really trying to let us go back down there. 

Q: After the collapse of the second building? 

A: Yeah, the second building. They wasn't trying to let us go down there. 
They had a lot of EMS personnel. I know there was still people around Ground Zero. 
There had to be some people trapped under trucks, I know that. But they wasn't trying to 
let us go down. That's the only thing, I really wanted to know why. I understand after it 
was un-safe. Cause I guess after that 7 came down. Well 7 didn't come down until like 
4, 5 o'clock. So I was just wondering, they just kept us cooped up in there for a long 



11 
J. FELTON 

time. They would occasionally let us go back out. I went back out, and walked around. 
It was messed up. Everybody talking about — around that time — there's another plane 
coming. I mean, we didn't know because we didn't have a TV and we didn't have a 
radio. We was just going our way. We heard it from the FBI agents or agents down 
there. We see people just running. I mean, I feel really bad for the people that was on 
the Church side, cause they really took the brunt of the debris on that side. I heard that an 
ambulance just got crushed on that side. That's why I really thank my partner for being 
like, let's go to the Vesey side. Cause there was another triage set up on the Church side, 
and I guess they was hit hard when the buildings collapsed and when that second airplane 
hit. I really thank him for that. Other than that, we was just cooped up in Stuyvesant 
High School for the whole time. Occasionally they let people go back down to the 
American Express Building. Later that night after 7 came down, they had it as a make- 
shift morgue too. It was a morgue after that. I was down there, I went down there to do 
morgue duty later on. I was just happy when I seen members from my Battalion come 
up. I was happy to see members from EMS period. They had city busses for the EMS 
workers and all that. I was happy to see them. I was just happy to see familiar faces that 
I know. That was basically all. I'm sorry for not knowing the times. 

Q: No, not a problem. 

A: I wasn't worried about knowing the times. I was just trying to get up outta 
there. 

Q: Right, right. 



12 



J. FELTON 

A: That's just the best of my knowledge. I just know that I spent the night 
down there, that's all I know. 

Q: You said in the beginning that when you were starting, you and Sean 

were getting breakfast on Fulton Street, okay, and you heard 3 1 Adam. 3 1 Adam was 
already in Manhattan? 

A: No, as a matter of fact, 3 1 David was already in Manhattan. 3 1 David. 
That was the unit that was already in Manhattan. They was calling 3 1 Adam. 

Q: Oh, to give them the job? 

A: To give them the job. So we heard them and we was like, put us on the 
back too. 

Q: Right. 

A: Cause we was like, on Fulton and Flatbush. We was right there by the 
Manhattan or the Brooklyn Bridge. So we was like, give us the job. We made it there 
before 3 1 Adam. When we pulled up on Vesey Street, we came down Vesey Street. 

Q: Right. 

A: Now I really remember. We came down Vesey Street, probably hit 
Fulton, came down Vesey, and then he made us park right here. So we went up the end 
of the block, made a U-turn, came back around and parked. That's exactly how I 
remember it now. We came down Vesey, went up, did a U-turn, 



13 
J. FELTON 

parked right here. I would say by the Merryl Lynch Building. Like in between that. We 
parked right between the American Express Building and the Merryl Lynch. What's that, 
4? 

Q: Yeah, 4 World Financial. Okay, what was your vehicle number? 

A: Urn, 94. 

Q: 94? 

A: Yeah. 94. We was parked right there. . . 

Q: And then you moved it again after the second plane went in they had to 
move it... 

A: No, no. After the second plane came in, they had us move into the 
American Express Building. It wasn't until after the second building came down that 
they told us to move right there. 

Q: And that's North End Avenue and Murray Street? 

A: Yeah. I would say around there. 

Q: And you said that vehicle 407 was also that, was that assigned here? 

A: Yes, it remained here because it was dead. 

Q: That was EMT Jackson' s vehicle? 

A: Yeah, Jackson, 3 1 Adam. And EMT Wright. Yeah, Jackson and Wright. 

Q: Okay. 



14 
J. FELTON 

A: It remained there the whole, even until the night time. Cause when I came 
back later on to do more duty, it was still there. It was cleaned out, but it was still there 
though. 

Q: Okay, so when you first got here to the American Express Building, you 
had no patients? 

A: No patients at that point. 

Q: So your first patient was when you were up at the high school? 

A: Yeah, basically. We had no patients from this side because, well the brunt 
of the work was being done on the Church side. This was behind, I would say it was 
Hotzollah, a few MetroCare, a lot of private, and we were there too, right there where we 
was at. Our EMS Lieutenant took control of their units too. 

Q: Do you remember any other EMS personnel from the department that was 
in the American Express Building? 

A: I remember my partner, Jackson, Wright, that's basically it. There was 
probably like 2 or 3 FDNY, and the rest was private. Along this street, they told us just 
to wait right there. That's another thing that had me pissed off too. Not pissed off, just 
kinda upset because we're on this job, we're just sitting here, not doing nothing. I mean, 
there's patients but we gotta just sit in here. I mean, I guess they did it for a certain 
reason. I wasn't there to dispute, that's not my job. I just did what they told me to do. 
They told me to wait right here, wait for patients. But I knew that all of the brunt of the 



15 



J. FELTON 

work was on the Church side. That's why I wanted to go there in the first place. Cause 
I've never seen nothing like this, I'm probably a trauma buff, or something like that. I 
don't know. We went there, that was our first patient when we got to Stuyvesant High 
School. I would say 1300 or 1400 hours, I'm not really sure what time it was. 

Q: And when you're at the high school, you and your partner split up, right? 

A: Before yeah. Right when we got the patient, that's when we split up. 
Cause he was driving and the medic jumped in the back, and I was like, I mean, I know 
there's nothing really for me to do except sit here and ride. There's a medic, so I just 
stayed. 

Q: So Sean drove with the medic? 

A: Yeah. 

Q: Was the medic from the city? 

A: He was from the department, yeah. FDNY, yeah. I didn't know him. I 
mean, I did see a few medics that I knew right before we got the patient. They was like, 
oh, we just got outta here. We took a patient that was burnt 90% to Cornell. This and 
that. But when we got our patient, I didn't know the medic. I gave him oxygen, I wiped 
his face off. He was just shaken up. He's like, I just got outta there with this guy too. I 
guess him and the ESU guy was on the same floor. He said that he was on the second 
floor and they had just got him out. 

Q: And the ESU cop, do you remember him saying what tower he was in? 

A: I'm about to say tower 2. Yeah, tower 2. 



16 



J. FELTON 



Q: He was in Tower 2? 

A: Yes. He was in Tower 2. 

Q: Okay, and you were treating him after tower one came down, or in 
between? 

A: No this was way after. Way after both buildings came down. I'm not 
really sure of the time. But this was after both of them came down. This was when they 
was like, it's unsafe to go down there, everybody come back. That's when all of the 
buildings in the surrounding area was on fire. That's when they was worried about 7 
coming down. This was after they had moved, they had a triage point at Stuyvesant, had 
a little make-shift hospital there. One of the main triages was at Chelsea Piers. 

Q: When you were at the American Express Building, you only saw the one 
EMS lieutenant? 

A: There was a few EMS lieutenants. But he was the one that was directing 
traffic. It was EMS lieutenants right there at Vesey and Westside Highway. I was 
mainly right there among the firefighters and all the ESU cops. I specifically seen Von 
Essen right there at Westside Highway and Vesey. I remember because I was leaning 
against one of the trucks. I remember somebody saying they was a such-and-such 
Commissioner of the Fire Department, asking one of the fire patrols for a scout pack. I 
seen at least 50, 60 guys run in the building. Then it came down. I guess the second 
plane just caught everybody by surprise, cause everybody just thought it was the first 



17 
J. FELTON 

tower, then the second plane hit in a matter of 5 minutes or less. The second tower come 
down first. Seeing those people jump, cause nobody wanted to burn. Seeing those 
people jump, it was just horrific, really. Not only seeing them jump, but seeing them land 
too. It was horrific. I know a lot of those who jumped, at least 50, probably 100 that they 
can't find. Cause all that rubble is on top of them. That's a high number, I mean, 
nothing else. Just seeing everybody running, leaving their equipment, leaving their bus, 
everything. Then going back down there later on that night and just seeing fire trucks in 
half. The main thing was fire trucks and ESU vehicles. Cause they was right under the 
pedestrian bridge. Actually, we was right under the pedestrian bridge when the second 
plane hit. We was right under it, cause they told us to just set up triage. So we had all of 
our equipment right there, and we walked down. I dunno, I guess they was trying to feel 
the vibe, or just trying to see what was going on. They was trying to get a better view of 
what was going on. It was me and my partner being nosey, but we walked down together 
though. After that, I never seen so many people take off running when the second plane 
hit. Everybody running, ran in the building, ran out the building, ran into another 
building. It was late in the day when 7 came down. It was like 3 : 00 or 4:00 when 7 came 
down. Still seen a lot of people leave. When we was at Stuyvesant high school, we still 
seen people running from the smoke, all the way at Chambers Street, and that was far 
away. That's basically it that I remember about the day. Basically it. 

Q: Alright thank you. The time is now 1646, interview is concluded. 



File No. 9110042 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

JACE PINKUS 

Interview Date: October 11, 2001 



Transcribed by Maureen McCormick 



MS. ROM: Today's date is October 11, 2001. 
The time now is 837 hours, and this is Lieutenant 
Pat Rom, the Fire Department City of New York. 

I'm conducting an interview with the 
following individual. 

Q. Please state your name, rank and title. 
A. Captain JACE PINKUS, P-I-N-K-U-S. 
Q. And your assigned command area, the Fire 
Department of the City? 

A. MetroTech communications, emergency medical 
dispatch . 

Q. Okay. We're here to discuss the -- 

MS. ROM: Also present for the interview 
is 

MS. MAGGI : Diana Maggi, EMT, investigations 
and trials . 

Q. Okay. We're here to discuss regarding the 
events of September 11, 2001. 

If you could describe to us where -- how you 
first became involved and any details of what 
transpired for that day. 

A. Early Tuesday morning, I was on the 7th Floor 
in my cubicle, and there were individuals stating that 
a plane had just crashed into the World Trade Center. 



JACE PINKUS 

Within a few moments, it was confirmed that there was a 
plane in one of the towers. 

At that point, Commissioner Gregory directed 
myself, EMT Sam Harris and Captain D'Amato to join him, 
and we were going to respond to the scene. At that 
point, we left the 7th Floor, received our equipment 
and proceeded over the Brooklyn Bridge. 

Q. What vehicle were you using? 

A. Commissioner Gregory's. Sam Harris was 
driving, and we responded into Manhattan using the 
bridge . 

Q. Brooklyn Bridge? Manhattan Bridge? 

A. Brooklyn Bridge. 

Q. Were you responding to any specific location 
at that point? 

A. As we were driving over the bridge, we -- it 
was confirmed that there was a fire in the north 
tower. We continued into Manhattan, and we got off at 
Park Row, made a left-hand turn onto Chambers, and made 
a left onto West Street, and parked on the corner of 
Vesey and West Street on the corner of -- I guess that 
would be the east side. 

Q. Parked on Vesey or on West? 

A. Right on the corner of Vesey. 



JACE PINKUS 

Q. So you parked on Vesey? 

A. Correct. 

We attempted to get our stuff out of the 
vehicle, and as we looked up, we saw a plane hit the 
second building, and we noticed that there was a large 
ball of flame coming from the second building. It was 
at this point that Commissioner Gregory directed EMT 
Harris to move the vehicle because there was debris, 
fire basically covering us on Vesey Street. 

EMT Harris moved the vehicle, I believe to 
the west side of Vesey, and I proceeded along with 
Commissioner Gregory and Captain D'Amato onto West 
Street, and I was in the middle of West Street in front 
of the American Express Building. 

At that point, I met up with Lieutenant 
Davila. There were a couple of units on the corner 
of -- actually, in the middle of the street on Vesey 
and West. Within moments -- 

Q. Two or three would you imagine? 

A. I saw at least three or four, and then there 
was a lot of chaos. 

Q. On West? 

A. Correct. 

There's a median on West Street, West Side 



JACE PINKUS 

Highway, that would be north of the pedestrian bridge, 
and at that point we noticed vehicles started to come 
in numerous directions. 

Within moments, I saw Chief Ganci . 
Commissioner Gregory proceeded on West, south -- 

Q. Commissioner? 

A. Gregory and Captain D'Amato. 

Q. You went which way? 

A. South on West Street. I saw Chief Nigro. 
Within a couple of more minutes, Lieutenant Howie Hahn 
arrived, Dr. Asceda, Dr. Cherson, and then there was 
another doctor. I forget his name. 

Q. Male, female? 

A. Male doctor. I think he's one of the 
fellows . 

Q. Where did you see Chief Nigro and -- 

A. Both of them were walking south on West. We 
were -- I was a few feet south on West. 

Q. Both of them meaning who? 

A. Chief Ganci and Chief Nigro. 

At that point -- again, must have been 
another -- a few more moments, Chief Goldfarb I was in 
contact with. At this point, we attempted -- as units 
were coming into the scene, and I believe they had 



JACE PINKUS 

started to set up, also there was Lieutenant Brad Mann, 
Lieutenant John Nevins . The two of them ended up in 
the intersection of Vesey and West and for better terms 
they assumed sort of a staging officer. 

Q. The two of them? 

A. Correct. 

There were a couple of Hatzolah ambulances 
coming into the scene. 

Q. One, two, three? 

A. I'd say at least two, and there was a large 
amount of vehicle movement north on West Street as 
vehicles were coming. To identify them, I couldn't at 
that point. 

As units were parking their vehicles, I 
believe along Vesey, along West, they were directed 
by -- making assumption that Lieutenant Mann and 
Lieutenant Nevins were sending vehicles parking along 
Vesey, parking them along West, and units started to 
walk up with their stretchers and equipment. 

Within a few minutes, I had a conversation 
with Chief Goldfarb that if needed we would be going 
to -- we identified American Express to be an area of 
triage. Time frame maybe ten minutes, fifteen minutes 
from the time I arrived. 



JACE PINKUS 

Q. That you talked to Chief Goldfarb? 

A. Correct. I had a conversation with the one 
doctor I had mentioned earlier. He had asked me should 
he get the antidote kit. I said to him yes. 

I believe he left to go to Dr. Asceda's car 
to get it. It must have been about another few more 
minutes went by, and we started to move the units with 
their stretchers along. I guess it would be in front 
of American Express Building, which is Three World 
Financial Center, and again within a period of time 
the -- I would say maybe about 30 units -- might have 
been two or three, per stretcher, but municipal 
voluntary and volunteers . 

We noticed as we were standing in the 
street -- we looked up. We did notice that there were 
people jumping from the buildings. I personally saw 
about 20. There was a lot of chaos going on along the 
building. The M.C.C., which is the local command 
center for communications, arrived. It was traveling 
south on West. I believe there was a P.D.T.H.V. also 
that came. 

Q. What is that? 

A. The police temporary headquarters vehicle. 
I believe there was another three or four 



JACE PINKUS 

Fire Department apparatus, again traveling south on 
West . 

Q. So the M.C.C. and the P.D. Temp were all 
traveling south on West; is that my understanding? 

A. Correct. 

Q. And fire apparatus? 

A. Correct. 

Q. Approximately -- 

A. I believe I saw at least two. 

Q. Could you identify them in any way? 

A. No. 

Q. Engine, ladder or anything? 

A. No. I would say one was a ladder. 

So at this point, it was all the chaos and 
the debris falling in front of the American Express 
Building, all on West. 

We moved closer to the building. It was at 
that point that the decision was made between myself 
and along with Chief Goldfarb that if things went sour, 
that the units were to take cover into the building, 
and I started to walk along the line along with Howie 
Hahn, Lieutenant Hahn. 

We took a roll call, writing down units as 
they arrived. I would say there was about 30 at one 



JACE PINKUS 

point, give or take. Might have been more. The task 
was given to him to specifically identify what units 
were there. 

Q. Lieutenant Hahn? 
A. Correct. 

I identified a paramedic unit, and a B.L.S. 
unit. I called it a fast unit, that if we needed, they 
would be the first to go, and I kept them right in 
front of the building. I guess that would be going 
north on West, but not really on West, but more on the 
side street of the American Express Building. 

We started to line the units up along the 
building, and at one point the line went west on Vesey, 
the units that were lined up with their stretchers. 

Again maybe 10, 15 minutes goes by. I gave 
directions that if things were to go sour, that they 
were to take cover. It was at that point when I 
personally heard a loud rumbling noise. I thought it 
was another plane hitting the tower, and that's when 
the entire street filled with smoke, debris, became 
totally black, and we ran into the American Express 
Building . 

At some point, I had been told that one of 
the medics was missing. I found out later that it was 



10 
JACE PINKUS 



Carlos Lillo that was missing. I saw his partner 
Abrieu — that's A-B-R-I-E-U. 

Then there was other scuffle that there were 
other people missing, unable to confirm. It was Chief 
Peruggia that we heard was missing. Chief McCracken, 
it was reported that he was missing. 

This is when we believed that it was a 
second -- like I said it was the first building that 
collapsed. We ran into the American Express Building. 
We took cover. We started to break -- myself, a couple 
of custodians within the building started to break 
windows . 

A couple of minutes goes by. Chief 
Carrasquillo, Chief Goldfarb, and I believe there was 
another chief. I don't recall who it was. Things just 
became havoc inside the building, people running all 
over the place, all units that -- pretty much that were 
all lined up, everybody just ran in between patient 
care and just -- I don't want to use the word 
panicking, but, like I said, really got nasty at that 
point . 

We went west of the American Express 
Building, maybe two exits. There was an exit onto 
Vesey, and then was a corridor which left out the back, 



11 

JACE PINKUS 



and according to the map, that would be the Merrill 
Lynch Building. 

We attempted to recoup, getting things 
together. We set up a little triage area in the rear 
of the American Express Building. There were other 
people walking around saying their partners were 
missing. Directions were given to Lieutenant Hahn by 
myself to try to -- there was a couple of paramedics. 
There was Paramedic Smiley I had contact with, and as I 
saw people, I attempted to find out if they knew where 
their partners were, and that was a combination of -- 
I'm sorry. Were you going to say something? 

We set up a little small triage area within 
American Express Building. Within a few minutes, we 
couldn't even stay in the building. We couldn't 
breathe. That's the reason why the windows were being 
broken . 

I ran out the west side onto Vesey. I heard 
people screaming that there was a Mayday. We heard a 
lot of screaming, a lot of yelling. The entire street 
was like the middle of winter. I noticed people 
running to their ambulances with their equipment. 

I noticed at least two firefighters had 
ducked underneath the fire apparatus. There was at 



12 
JACE PINKUS 



least five or six. I believe there was two engine 
companies that were on Vesey, and there was some 
firefighters ducking on Vesey. 

Q. Can you identify them? 

A. By number? I believe it was an engine, and I 
also noticed that there was a -- a suburban, a chief's 
vehicle . 

The ambulances were parked diagonally or they 
were backed straight in to Vesey. The entire street 
was just full of smoke and debris, and you really 
couldn't see in front of you. 

Again, I ran back in trying to find out where 
all my people were. That was one of my main 
ob j ectives . 

Q. And at that point -- who was with you at that 
time? 

A. Lieutenant Hahn, Paramedic Smiley, a couple 
of paramedics from Metro Care, others I couldn't 
identify. At one point, I -- there must have been 
about 20 individuals start to regroup. 

Q. Initially, the initial A.L.S. and B.L.S. you 
had lead, do you know who they were? 

A. By name, no. By unit, no, I couldn't 
identify them. 



13 
JACE PINKUS 



Q. Okay. And Chief Nigro and Chief Ganci? 

A. I had seen them for a few minutes, few 
minutes at the beginning. I hadn't seen them since. 

Q. Okay. That was that first time you saw them 
walking towards -- 

A. Chief Ganci asked me something regarding -- 
he said, "Captain . " I don't recall exactly what he 
said, but it was a moment, not long. Like I said, they 
all went south onto West. 

I believe Chief Martin at one point might 
even have even showed up in the building, in the 
American Express Building. They had also set up 
refreshments and water in the building. As people were 
running around, people running in, grabbing the water 
and running out, so I couldn't even identify who they 
were. They were running. 

Like I said, there was a Mayday called. You 
really couldn't see too much in front of you while we 
were on Vesey Street. At some point, I started to run 
into the back of the building, because I was looking 
for somebody, and then I heard another noise, and that 
is when I took cover. I was by myself laying on the 
ground, covered my head, did a lot of praying. 

After I felt it was safe, I got back up 



14 
JACE PINKUS 



again. Again, we tried to set up another triage area, 
but it just didn't -- there was such havoc going on, 
that there was no control. People were just running, 
civilians and emergency workers, et cetera. I went 
over to a fireman I could not identify and gave him 
some water. 

Back on Vesey, and at some point I walked 
down -- I believe this is North End Avenue to the front 
of the Embassy Hotel, which would be on North End 
between Vesey and Murray. I noticed that the Merv was 
in front of it, a couple of police vehicles, emergency 
service vehicles. I was talking to one of the cops 
trying to get another mask. Inside the -- backtrack a 
little bit. Chief Gombo I had seen earlier. 
Q. Was that the one time you saw him? 
A. Yeah. No, but I saw him later on. When I 
got back to the hotel, that's what made me recall 
seeing him, and Lieutenant Terranova. 

I also attempted to call the center a few 
times, the communications center via cell phone a 
couple of times. I was able to get through. A couple 
of times I couldn't get through. 

Ended up in the Embassy Hotel. There was 
Chief Goldfarb, Lieutenant Terranova, Chief Gombo, 



15 
JACE PINKUS 



Chief Pascal, Chief Carrasquillo, Chief Basile. I saw 
Captain Sickles, Lieutenant Yioras, Y-I-O-R-A-S. I 
noticed that he started to not feel well, so I went 
over to him, myself and EMT Harris, took off his coat. 
Looked like he was exhausted. We sat him down. 

Within sometime after that, we were given 
directions to go along with chief -- myself, EMT 
Harris, and Chief Pascal were given directions that we 
were going to Chelsea Piers. 

Prior to that, I walked down Vesey again, and 
I believe at that time the second building collapsed, 
because again the entire street filled up with smoke, 
and debris, and again we couldn't see in front of us 
what was going on. I heard a lot of alarms going off. 
We didn't know for sure if it was the building, and we 
heard a pass alarm, which is part of the self-contained 
breathing apparatus. I heard that from somebody. 
People just running up and down Vesey Street. 

At that point, myself, Chief Pascal and EMT 
Harris walked down North End Avenue. That would be 
north. We continued walking down North End. We saw 
lieutenant -- I don't recall who it was, but there was 
a trailer. I believe it was on Park Place. We 
continued walking down to Chambers Street, and at that 



16 
JACE PINKUS 



point, we met up with, again, another lieutenant. I 
don't recall who it was. Myself, EMT Harris and Chief 
Pascal got into the rear of a vehicle, an ambulance. 
We ended up on Westside Highway. 

Q. Do you know which ambulance you were in? 

A. I don't know. 

Q. Or what vehicle? 

A. It was a municipal ambulance, but I don't 
recall who. 

Q. Okay. You're in the back of the ambulance? 

A. Back of the ambulance. There was no 
equipment in the back of the ambulance, and as we 
headed to Chelsea Piers, we were flagged down on maybe 
6th Street and Westside Highway. There was a 
pedestrian struck. 

The three of us got out of the vehicle, 
provided some patient care. Turned out to be the 
patient was not a pedestrian struck, but was on the 
80th Floor of the first building. Spoke to him, talked 
to him, trying to find out what was going on, comfort 
him, put him in the back of the ambulance. We strapped 
him in the captain's chair. 

The first vehicle that we were in, and Chief 
Pascal flagged down another ambulance, turned out to 



17 
JACE PINKUS 



be -- I guess it was a logistics unit, another 
ambulance full of long boards. That was it. There was 
an antidote kit laying on the floor in the back. 
Myself, EMT Harris got into the rear of the vehicle. 
Chief Pascal got into the passenger side of the cab, 
and we continued north on Westside Highway until we got 
to Chelsea Piers, and at that point we met up with 
Chief Kowalzyk, and the directions that were given to 
me, me -- and Kevin Mahon was up there also. 

We attempted to identify what units were 
there, and I walked from -- I guess that would be 11th 
Street up to, say, maybe 24th Street where I met up 
with Lieutenant Bearman. 

Our objective was to move the ambulances 
south to sort of organize the number of ambulances. 
That had to be at least 60, if not more, ambulances 
that were all the way up the Westside Highway. 

Q. Okay. So you placed the second building 
collapsing at what stage? 

A. I would say at the point I ran out of the 
building, out of the American Express Building. Time 
frame? I couldn't tell you. I would say maybe 2 
minutes, a half an hour. 

Q. After you arrived? 



JACE PINKUS 

A. After I arrived. At least, if not more. 
Time frame itself, specific time frame, I couldn't tell 
you, but I would say it was at the point I had seen 
Chief Martin. 

Q. At that point, if we could reference it when 
we were going to Chelsea Piers, was how long before 
that? 

A. I can't tell you. I know I was on the 
American Express for sometime. It was definitely some 
time that I had been there. There was a lot of 
activity going on in the building and along Vesey. 
There were some other individuals. Dr. Richmond I 
believe I saw also. 

Q. Where would you have seen Dr. Richmond? 

A. Well, I know for sure I saw him later on in 
the evening, but I believe I saw him, you know, I stand 
corrected. I saw him later on in the day, later in the 
evening . 

Q. We are really focusing on up until the second 
World Trade Center collapse, what events transpired 
during that time frame. 

At any time were you ever in those buildings? 

A. Which buildings? 

Q. In the World Trade Center. 



19 
JACE PINKUS 



A. No. 

Q. Your overall impression of what was going on, 
how -- 

A. It was something that I definitely never 
experienced before. I know I had an objective. It 
changed multiple times. When we first got there, we 
just thought we had a really bad fire, you know, the 
first building, and as we got out of the car we saw the 
second one, and it turned out to -- you know, we first 
thought that we were going to be waiting for patients 
to come to you, and that point when the first building 
collapsed, it all changed. 

My main objective was to know where my people 
were at. But at one point I got scared that I had lost 
more than, you know -- I was lucky how everything 
turned out, except for one, you know. At one point, I 
think I had two or three people there. I had 60 to 70 
people, so that was my first objective was to patients 
who were going to come to me, or my resources were 
going to go to the patients. It all changed. It was a 
definite experience that I -- even to this day, you 
know, still talk about. It was scary, especially when 
I -- the building -- I heard that noise. I thought for 
sure there was another building and -- 



20 
JACE PINKUS 



Q. On the reports of Paramedic Lillo, did you 
ever see him or that's something just told to you? 

A. I might have seen him earlier. I mean I know 
Carlos, I know him for a long time. I might have seen 
him earlier, but I definitely do recall seeing his 
partner saying that he was missing. 

Q. And you saw his partner at what point? 

A. It was in the first 20 minutes maybe I had 
seen him. 

Q. Is there anything else you would like to 
include as part of this interview? 

A. There was a lot of talk going on, because 
there was -- there was a period of time at the 
beginning before any real activity was going on with us 
about the people that were coming in the buildings . 
There was a lot of comments about that. 

MS. ROM: Okay. All right. We would like to 

thank you for, you know, being a part of this 

interview with us, and I'm going to say that this 

concludes our interview. It's now 903 hours, and 

this concludes our interview. 



File No. 9110043 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

EMS CAPTAIN FRANK D'AMATO 

Interview Date: October 11, 2001 



Transcribed by Elisabeth F. Nason 



F. D'AMATO 

MR. FEILER: Today's date is October 11, 
2001. The time now is 829 hours, this is 
Lieutenant Monte Feiler of the Fire Department of 
the City of New York. I'm conducting an interview 
with the following individual. 

Q. Please state your name, rank and command. 
A. Frank D'Amato, EMS Captain, Bureau of 

Communications . 

MR. FEILER: Of the Fire Department of the 
City of New York. We are conducting this 
interview in the Investigations and Trials hearing 
room, fourth floor at 9 Metrotech, New York City 
Fire Department headquarters. The interview is 
regarding the events of September 11, 2001. Also 
present is Investigator Velez. 

Q. Please state your name, title and command. 
A. My name is George Velez, EMT, also an 

investigator for the Bureau of Trials and 

Investigations . 

Q. Captain D'Amato, if we can just get a 

scenario of what occurred that morning of September 

11. 

A. Well, I started my morning here at 

headquarters on the 7th floor, communications. I'm 



F. D'AMATO 

going to say I don't know about the first plane hit, 
but after the first plane hit, I'm guessing 8:30, 
quarter to nine, we saw a lot of the Citywide tour 
commanders and their aides running past my desk. I 
asked them what's going on. They said a plane just hit 
the Trade Center. 

At that time, we all went to the window and 
we saw flames coming out. At that point I thought 
actually it was like a small plane, like a sea plane or 
something. I had no time to think. Then we saw the 
magnitude of what was going on as far as the flames and 
Commissioner Gregory asked myself, Captain Pincus and 
EMT Sam Harris, to get our gear together. We were 
going down to the scene. 

We all got into Commissioner Gregory's car. 
We went over the Brooklyn Bridge. I'm not really sure 
which route we took after the bridge, but we came south 
on West Street and we pulled into Vesey Street facing 
opposite the water. I guess that's east. 
Q. I have a map here. 

A. Let me see that. We came down Barclay Street 
and we made a left on to West and then we made another 
left on to Vesey, so we stopped the car at the corner 
of West and Vesey. I guess that's 6 World Trade 



F. D'AMATO 

Center . 

When we got out of the vehicle, we opened the 
trunk, we put our helmets on and our jackets. At that 
time we heard another explosion which I thought was a 
secondary explosion, but which I later found it out was 
a second plane that hit. At that point, Commissioner 
Gregory instructed Sam Harris to move the car a little 
bit away from where we had parked it. I believe he 
parked it on Vesey on the west side of West Street. 

At that point I tell you, I don't remember 
what happened with Sam Harris, or Jace Pincus . All I 
knew is that me and Commissioner Gregory proceeded 
south on West Street crossing in front of 1 World Trade 
Center, making our way to the corner of West and 
Liberty. There is a barrier that separates the two 
sides of West Street. We were on the side closer to 
the twin towers and while we were walking we were 
getting hit with small fragments of glass. We observed 
two bodies on the floor, partial bodies. I'm guessing 
they were jumpers. 

As we made our way down West Street to 
Liberty, there was more and more debris falling. At 
that point I told Commissioner Gregory I think we 
should jump over the barrier and walk on the opposite 



F. D'AMATO 

side of West, because we were getting in too close, I 
was getting really nervous . 

Once we got to the corner of West and 
Liberty, we met up with Chief Barbara, Chief Barbara. 
They were setting up a command post at the corner. I 
was there for about 10 minutes or so and what I noticed 
is we were getting a lot of ambulances starting to pile 
up on Liberty Street between West and South End Avenue 
I believe that is. There was no supervision there, so 
I told Commissioner Gregory I was going to start 
organizing the vehicles that got there, there had to be 
almost, about a dozen at the time. 

I start setting staging up for some 
ambulances on the corner of South End and Liberty 
Street. After about 15 minutes, Chief Kowalczyk pulled 
up and he whispered to me to just think terrorism. 
Actually, he said, you know, be alert, just think 
terrorism. Then I think he might have made his way 
over to the command post. So again I start setting up 
the vehicles, I set up a little triage area right at 
the corner of Liberty and South End. 

After about 5 minutes after that, Chief 
McCracken and Chief Grant came to the location where I 
was. They took control of the scene. Chief Grant and 



F. D'AMATO 

Chief McCracken instructed the staging to line up on 
South End off of Liberty so that we were one block 
west, parallel with the West Side Highway and we set up 
staging there. They felt it was more safer. 

We were setting up. We weren't seeing many 
patients at this time. The whole area was kind of 
quiet. I was surprised that we weren't seeing anybody 
funneling out of the buildings, but I learned later on 
a lot of people were funneling out like on Church 
Street and West Broadway because there wasn't many 
people coming out at all on the West Side Highway from 
the different towers. 

Whatever time it was when that first building 
started to come down, all we heard was just like a loud 
thunder that didn't stop. When you looked up you saw 
the debris starting to fall from the top, and a cloud 
of smoke on top and it was hard to judge where the 
debris was going to fall, because it were so high. 
Your depth perspective. 

Everybody started running. Everybody in my 
area started running down the South End south. A lot 
of people running into little store fronts on that 
street. I was afraid to run into the store front 
because I thought that like the building was going to 



F. D'AMATO 

collapse, like a domino, and I didn't want to be 
crushed underneath the collapse. Thinking about it 
now, I don't think I was going to outrun a 110 story 
building, but I proceeded down South End and I made a 
right turn on Albany Street and as I turned on Albany I 
looked over my shoulder and I saw the big cloud of dust 
that was already on the ground like just making its way 
down the block, just like a movie. 

I continued running down Albany Street and 
within seconds I was just in total darkness, the dust 
engulfed me. I had to stop running, I couldn't see 
where I was and I didn't know what was in front of me, 
what was around me. Everything was very quiet. Every 
breath I took in, my mouth was getting filled with 
debris, dust particles and cement particles. It was 
turning into like a pasty texture that you could almost 
chew. I kept spitting it out. 

I was having trouble breathing. My eyes were 
shut. We didn't have any breathing apparatus or 
anything. I was just leaning up against the building 
that I was next to and I tried walking, but I kept 
banging into things in front of me. Again, I couldn't 
see 2 inches in front of my face. I really said to 
myself this is how I'm going to die. I can't believe 



F. D'AMATO 

this is how I'm going to die. 

I started walking, I'm sure for a very short 
period of time, I mean seconds, but it felt like it was 
forever I was standing there. I thought, you know, the 
dust, it was so dark still. Again I don't know how 
long it stood pitch black for but it just seemed like 
it was forever and I just started panicking and I 
started screaming help, and I heard somebody answer me 
back. Like they started saying, keep coming, keep 
coming. Their voice was echoing and I couldn't figure 
out what was going on. 

I started walking a little more just by feel 
with my right hand against the side of the building. I 
got to what I thought was the corner of the block, 
because the building had ended and turned in. It was a 
step. I stepped up on the step and some guy grabbed my 
hand and we started walking down and what it was was a 
parking lot attendant who pulled me into an underground 
parking garage. 

At that point, he had hosed me down, I was 
full of dust. My eyes, my head, my face, he hosed me 
down. He put me into a car that he had started up, had 
an air conditioner running, I guess trying to just get 
me back to some kind of sense. I mean I was out of it 



F. D'AMATO 

for a little while. 

After about 10 minutes, he had -- there was 
like a little parking lot attendant office there. I 
went into the office, there was a phone there. I 
couldn't remember the number to the dispatcher, I was 
just so out of it. My brother happens to work at 1 
Metrotech, where he dispatches for Bear Stearns. So I 
had called my brother and I told him where I was . I 
knew where I was because there was a little receipt 
ticket with the phone number and I said go downstairs 
to the dispatcher, just tell them where I am, because 
at this point, I really thought that I was like trapped 
underneath this garage, because I didn't know that the 
building just pancaked down. I thought it was just all 
over the place. 

I told him where I was . I gave him the phone 
number. After about another 5 minutes of sitting down, 
just catching my breath, I went out a back door of the 
parking garage. It was visible outside. It was almost 
like a tannish dust coating. Everything was just 
covered with dust, 4 or 5 inches deep. It really 
looked like a war zone. People were just totally 
covered. It looked almost like sawdust. It was just 
was just all over there. 



10 
F. D'AMATO 



I finished walking Albany and now I was on -- 
like a little pier along the water. I don't know even 
know what it was. Esplanade. I'm looking at this 
map. But it was a little pier or boardwalk that runs 
along the water. All I kept hearing was the 
firefighters, I guess their alarms when they separate 
from people, just going off and that keeps sticking in 
my head. 

The police that were there, everybody was 
walking south. They were directing everybody south. 
We started walking south. I must have been walking 
maybe about two minutes and I heard the rumble again. 
Again, it was the same noise, that thunder that didn't 
stop. It was the second tower coming down. It was the 
same scenario. Here comes a big cloud of smoke. 
Everybody starts running south on this little 
boardwalk. The people weren't knocking each other 
over, but I think there were spots where there was a 
lot of people, people were tripping and falling. I 
remember seeing like parents holding children in their 
hand, like covering their mouth and trying to run with 
them. One or two people fell that were helped up, not 
by me, but by people next to them. Civilians, police 
officers, and the smoke hit us again. 



11 

F. D'AMATO 



It wasn't as dense as the first building, but 
it was still very difficult to breathe. I'm looking at 
the map. I wound up running into a little lobby of -- 
I don't know if it was an office building or a high 
rise, somewhere around I'm going to say Rector Place, 
looking at this map, or maybe one more block south and 
once I was in there they provided us with bathrooms . 
We were rinsing our eyes and rinsing our face. Again 
took about 10 minutes to get your composure back after 
going through this again. 

When I came out it was like a big area. I'm 
going to say it was maybe this Rector Place area. 
There is a lot of grass. That's where I met back up 
with Chief McCracken and Chief Grant. At that point 
there was police boats, fire boats, tug boats. We 
started loading people on to the boat, who were 
civilians from that area on to the boats . The boats 
were taking people I believe to Liberty Island, Liberty 
State Park and Staten Island. 

It took us about 20 minutes to clear that 
area. The people, they didn't want to get on the 
boats. They thought those locations weren't convenient 
or whatever. After we cleared that area, I was also 
with Lieutenant -- her name will come to me. She's 



12 
F. D'AMATO 



from operations at the time. After we cleared the area 
an EMT, I don't know his name, pulled up in like a golf 
cart. Pauline Cronin. She was with us. 

At that time, Chief McCracken, Chief Grant, 
Lieutenant Cronin and myself, we jumped into the golf 
cart after the area was cleared of civilians. We went 
to the Staten Island Ferry terminal. That's where we 
had a triage set up. Once I got there, I was actually 
treated for about 45 minutes with oxygen and my eyes 
were irrigated. That's pretty much where I stood up 
until about 8:30 at night. 

Chief McCracken and Chief Grant had left that 
area. They had to attend a meeting, operations meeting 
on the scene. I don't know where that meeting was. 
They had left and Chief Villani was then there. I 
don't know what time he showed up. Chief Steffens came 
into the area where I was. I know Chief Brown came 
there. He was treated and transported. Again most of 
the patients we saw there were firefighters. Most of 
it was just eye irrigation. There was a lot of 
employees from the Department on duty and off duty at 
this location. A lot of doctors were coming down from 
the surrounding emergency rooms . We had an 
overabundance of people. 



13 
F. D'AMATO 



I stayed there until about 8:30. Chief 
Villani sent me down to One Liberty Plaza about 8:30, 
there was some operation going on over there. Again we 
weren't seeing much patients. They sent me back to be 
more useful over there. I went over to One Liberty 
Plaza. I was driven there by -- I don't know -- some 
vehicle, some pick up or SUV. They had a big staging 
going on, a treatment center over there. There were 
reports that they might have to be cutting limbs off, 
people that were trapped and they had a whole big 
triage center there. I'm not sure who the supervisors 
were there. I'm not familiar with them, but everything 
was running fine there. 

My eyes, from being right next to Ground 
Zero, the Trade Centers, now again, were getting 
irritated. I couldn't see, my eyes were burning. So I 
wound up transporting a patient with another BLS unit 
to Bellevue Hospital at around about midnight. This 
unit was -- I don't know -- if they were Midwood 
ambulance company, because they were going back into 
Brooklyn after we dropped the patient off. They 
provided me a ride after we went to Bellevue. They 
provided me a ride to Metrotech. 

Because again I went down with Commissioner 



14 
F. D'AMATO 



Gregory to get the ride down there. They dropped me 
back off at Metrotech. I got back to Metrotech about 
12:30. That's where I met back up with Commissioner 
Gregory. At that time he told me that Sam and himself, 
Sam Harris, Jace Pincus had made their way north. I 
believe they were in Chelsea. That is where we had got 
separated. When I went south, they had went north. 

That was my experience for the day. I must 
have went home about one o'clock that morning. 

Q. I just want to retrace a few things. At the 
very beginning you say when you first found out about 
it, were you able to see the building burning from 
headquarters here or how did you get that information? 

A. The Citywide tour commander aides said that 
you can see it. I remember him saying you can see it 
from Chief Ganci ' s office. Chief Ganci is around the 
corridor from me. I went over to Commissioner 
Gregory's office. I couldn't see what was going on. I 
really didn't see what was going on until we were on 
the Brooklyn Bridge going into Manhattan. It was just 
an amazing sight. 

Q. Were you directed to any specific area by 
communications or you went on the direction of 
Commissioner Gregory? 



15 
F. D'AMATO 



A. I went on the direction of Commissioner 
Gregory. I was assuming we were going to help out 
anyway we could. We don't have radio designations, 
myself, Captain Pincus, Sam Harris. I guess we were 
going to be more of an aide to Commissioner Gregory, 
who is the commissioner liaison and help out in any way 
we could. We were not directed in anyway by operations 
or had any task assigned to us at the scene. 

Q. When you met up with Chief McCracken and 
Chief Grant, after they directed you to take, you had 
already set up staging? 

A. I had initialized staging till there was 
another officer on the scene. 

Q. Do you know who that officer was? 

A. There was no other officer on the scene. 
That's why I started. I don't know how those 
ambulances were sent to that location. 

Q. Right. 

A. But when I saw there was no supervision, I 
told Commissioner Gregory I was going to take control 
of what was going on here, because there was just no 
direction. I started organizing and then once Chief 
Grant got there, I believe he may have gotten there a 
little before Lieutenant Cronin and Chief McCracken. 



16 
F. D'AMATO 



He advised me that he was taking control of 
the scene. He directed me to have all the ambulances 
move a little further down and all on one side of the 
street. This way they have egress. 

Q. Did the Chiefs remain there with you? 

A. The Chiefs remained there with me. I got 
separated from them when we all started running when 
the first building started to come down. 

Q. Was Lieutenant Cronin was present with you 
there too? 

A. Lieutenant Cronin was present there also. 

Q. What about the crews from the ambulances? 

A. There was a lot of Hatzolah ambulances, 
Hatzolah also had what looked like a MERV there at this 
location. There were numerous vehicles -- Long Island 
College Hospital, lot of municipal FDNY vehicles. I 
had written the units down on paper. I don't know 
where that paper is. I must have dropped it while I 
was running. I don't know. I don't want to start 
rambling off units that I'm not sure. There was, even 
the people there, the faces I recognize, but I couldn't 
put a name to them. I can't give you names. 

Q. At any time, did you have an opportunity to 
enter any of the buildings? 



17 
F. D'AMATO 



A. World Trade Center buildings? 

Q. Yes. 

A. No, the only buildings I ever ran into was 
the underground parking garage and then later on during 
the second collapse I was able to get into another 
lobby of again, I don't know if it was an office or if 
it was like an apartment building. 

Q. Did you have a handy talky on you? 

A. I had a handy talky, the UHF, EMS radio. I 
didn't need to make any radio communications while I 
was setting staging up. There was a lot of stuff going 
on again, Chief Kowalcyzk knew where I was. I didn't 
make any radio communications because again I wasn't in 
control of that sector very long once the Chiefs had 
gotten there. So no, I didn't make any radio 
communications . 

Q. Other than the people that you told me about, 
the Chiefs, Lieutenant Cronin, were there any other 
EMTs, fire officers, anybody from our service that you 
can specifically recognize and put a location to them? 

A. The last -- I -- again I said earlier, when 
me and Commissioner Gregory got to the corner of 
Liberty Street and West Street, Chief Barbara was at 
that location. They had started setting up a command 



F. D'AMATO 

post at that location. 

I remember seeing when I first exited the car 
that we parked on Vesey and West while we were walking 
down the west side, I remember seeing Steve -- Chief 
Ganci's aide. Steve Mosiello. He was getting stuff 
out of his vehicle. I didn't see Chief Ganci but I saw 
Steve . 

Q. Where was that? 

A. That was on West Street between Vesey and 
Liberty. His car was parked more towards Vesey. 
Looking at the map, I guess on the west side of West 
Street . 

Q. Is there anything else that you think is 
important that you would like to include before we 
conclude? 

A. No. 

MR. FEILER: Okay. I am going to conclude 

the interview. I want to thank you for your time 

in assisting us in this endeavor. The time now is 

852 hours. We are concluding the interview now. 



File No. 9110044 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMT PASQUALE FELITTI 
Interview Date: October 11, 2001 



P. FELITTI 

CHRISTOPHER ECCLESTON: Today's date is October 11, 2001. The 
time is 9:57. My name is Christopher Eccleston of the Fire Department 
of the City of New York. I'm conducting and interview with the 
following individual. Please state your name, title, rank, and assigned 
command area of the Fire Department of the City of New York regarding 
the events of September 11 , 2001. 

PASQUALE FELITTI: My name is Pasquale Felitti, I'm an EMT assigned 
to EMS Battalion 4. 

Q: Were you assigned to the World Trade Center disaster on 
September 11 th , 2001? 

A: Yes. 

Q: En route to this call, what did you see? 

A: You could see the North Tower with a big hole in the side of 
it. It was kind of chaotic, people running away from it. 

Q: When you arrived on the scene, where did you park your 
vehicle? 

A: Parked in between Fulton and Dey street on Church Street. 

Q: Can you indicate on the map we provided for you with a 1, 
the location where you were? Okay? And what vehicle were you in? 

A: Vehicle 108. 

Q: Vehicle 108, okay. When you arrived there, did any 
civilians report anything to you? 



P. FELITTI 

A: No, they just kind pointed us over to another EMS crew where 
there was people hurt. 

Q: Whom did you first report to when you arrived? 

A: When we first got there, we didn't report to anybody, there 
was no one there. It was us, a New York Downtown unit, 4 Henry was on 
the scene, and 1 Adam. We went over to medic unit, the Downtown unit, 
and we helped out over there. When the second plane hit, me and my 
partner were separated. I wound up going with Lt . Melarango towards the 
South tower to get people out. We didn't go into it but towards there. 
My partner went with a cop who led him over to a church. There were 
patients over there. We got separated until the following day. 

Q: Okay, what time approximately did you arrive on the scene? 

A: We were coming out of New York downtown hospital when the 
first plane hit. I think we were actually 98. 

Q: So the first plane crashed in at 9:06. So it was shortly 
after that? 

A: Yeah, right away. Right after the first plane hit. 

Q: 8:48, so you arrived shortly after that? Okay, I'm sorry. 
What did you do between the time the first plane hit and the second 
plane hit? 

A: We were treating the ambulatory patients. Whoever was left 

in the area after walking wounded, we just picked up, put them in 

a bus and got them out of there. 



P. FELITTI 

Q: Then you said after the second plane hit you went 

somewhere with Lieutenant...? 

A: Melarango 

Q: Where did you go? 

A: Towards the south tower, which was just hit. We came in 
between building 5 and building 4. Cause people were coming out. We 
were just directing traffic. Telling them "walk that way", up towards 
Church Street, Dey Street, over there. 

Q: What did you do once you got over there? 

A: Just directed traffic and stuff. That was after the second 
plane hit. Then they sent me back to go find my partner. When I came 
back, me and (inaudible) were separated, so I wound up moving the 
vehicle around to the staging area, which was Vesey and West Street. 

Q: Okay, so just indicate on the map with a number 2, where you 
moved the vehicle to? 

A: Okay, I never actually got to Vesey street. I was blocked 
by fire apparatus on the Westside Highway. 

Q: So you never entered any of the World Trade Center 
buildings? 

A: No, we didn't go into them. 

Q: What happened after you got over to Vesey and West? 



P. FELITTI 

A: I was at the first triage center, which is on the corner of 
West and Vesey Street. I was with Mike D'Angelo, who is one of the 
communications guys that was there. I was triaging over there, when the 
first tower started to collapse. When the South Tower collapsed, we 
evacuated up Vesey Street towards Fulton. Yeah, when the first tower 
went down, we were right on Vesey Street. 

Q: And what did you do in between the time when the first tower 
collapsed and the second tower? 

A: Just re-grouped, there was a lot of dust, you know, a lot of 
people walking around. They started to set up a triage in a second 
building in between Vesey and Murray Street, around that area. A 
fireman was complaining of back pain. He said he was hit by debris and 
stuff that was falling from the first one. So as we started to triage 
him, it was awhile after the first building fell, they were like an hour 
apart, so I guess it was about 15 or 20 minutes after the first one fell 
that he made his way out to us. As we were assesing him, he said the 
second building was starting to fall. So me and, I forget the guys 
name, me and a MetroCare paramedic, we put him into a St. Luke's 
ambulance that was running, and we transported him to St. Vincent's 
Hospital. That was after the second building collapsed. His injuries 
were--he had broken ribs. We think it was a punctured lung because he 
had no lung sounds on the right side. So we transported him to 21 after 
the second building collapsed. 

Q: You weren't with the St. Luke's crew? 



P. FELITTI 

A: No, the St. Luke's Crew wasn't there, they left the bus 
running. Cause what happened when the first building collapsed, the 
Lieutenants and stuff along the side on Vesey Street said take any 
ambulance that's running and move it. So people moving them. We got 
the patient. There was a St. Lukes bus there. It was running. So we 
just loaded him up and took off. 

Q: Who is the person you were with? 

A: It was myself. I was driving, and the paramedic from 
MetroCare. Paul, I think his name was. 

Q: Okay. Do you know approximately what time this was? This 
was after the Second Tower? 

A: After the Second Collapse. 

Q: Okay, the Second Tower collapsed at 10:29. 

A: Between 10:30 and 10:40 is when we left. Cause there was 
still dust everywhere. You couldn't see where you were going. 

Q: Okay, and you brought this patient to hospital...? 

A: 21, St. Vincent's. 

Q: Okay, and from St. Vincent's? 

A: From St. Vincent's we went back down to the Chelsea Pier's 
staging. That's where they had all the ambulances staging. 

Q: Do you know about what time you got back to Chelsea Piers? 

A: Probably between 10:45 and 11:00, give or take. 



P. FELITTI 

Q : Okay . 

A: Yeah, around that time. 

Q: Okay, and what did you do after you got to the Chelsea 
station? 

A: I reported to the Lieutenant there, I forget who it was. I 
told him I was half crew. We wound up taking a group of doctors from 
there to South Street, the ferry where they had set up another triage 
area. So me and a guy from the Bronx, who was just one of the vehicle 
movers or something like that. Me and him took the doctors over to the 
ferry. They sent--they left me over there. That's where I spent the 
remainder of the day from there from about 11:00 to 4 or 5 in the 
afternoon . 

Q: And what did you see over at the triage area? 

A: At the triage they did— walking wounded. I think they 
brought in a couple of firemen and police officers. Stuff like that. 
Not much came through there. Yeah firefighters and some police. 

Q: Do you remember what any of their names were? 

A : No , I don ' t remember . 

Q: Okay, that's fine. Is there anything else you would like to 
tell me about the events that happened up until approximately 12 noon on 
this day? 

A: Not much, I mean, I think we did triage a little too close 
to the actual MCI. I mean, nobody knew the building was gonna fall like 
that, but, I mean, I think the engineers or somebody should have gotten 
there faster keep the firemen out. Like they 



P. FELITTI 

said on the news about the jet fuel, it burns at 3,000 degrees or 
something. I mean, no one ever expected something like this, so you 
can't say the Fire Department got caught without their pants. 

Q: Did you make any radio communications during this time that 
would be important for us to know about? 

A: Just that we were transporting one to St. Vincent's. 

Q: Okay, anything else that you would like to add? 

A: No. 

Q: Okay, I thank you very much for having this interview with 
me. This interview is concluded at 10:06 AM. The counter on the 
cassette player is 169. 



File No. 9110045 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
LIEUTENANT WILLIAM MELARANGO 
Interview Date: October 11, 2001 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



W. MELARANGO 2 

MR. ECCLESTON: Today's date is October 
11th, 2001. The time is 10:20. This is 
Christopher Eccleston of the New York City 
Fire Department. I'm conducting an 
interview with the following individual. 

Please state your name, rank, title and 
assigned command area of the Fire Department 
of the City of New York regarding the events 
of September 11th, 2001. 

LIEUTENANT MELARANGO: Lieutenant 
William Melarango shield number 407 assigned 
to Battalion 4 on September 11th. 
Q. Were you assigned to the World Trade 

Center disaster on September 11th, 2001? 
A. Yes. 
Q. In route to the alarm, what did you 

see? 

A. I saw the north tower, smoke coming 

from the north tower. 

Q. Upon arrival where did you park your 

vehicle? 

A. I parked my command car on Broadway and 

Fulton, facing westbound. 

Q. Can you just indicate on the map with a 



W. MELARANGO 3 

1 where you had parked your vehicle. 

A. I did. 

Q. On arrival did any civilians report 
anything to you? 

A. No, not directly towards me. Civilians 
were running away from the scene. 

Q. Did you report to anybody when you 
first arrived there? 

A. I saw a treatment area that was 
established in front of the Millennium Hotel on 
Church and Fulton Street. 

Q. You went to this triage area? 

A. I went to the treatment area and saw 
Lieutenant Medjuck and Captain Olszewski and 
Lieutenant Davila. 

Q. What did you do at this point? 

A. Just assisted with patient care 
details. There was a supply truck that pulled up 
with some additional oxygen tanks and back 
boards, which I helped off-load. Trying to get 
personnel established, make sure everybody had 
helmets on, safety considerations. 

Q. About what time did you arrive on the 
scene? 



W. MELARANGO 4 

A. I heard the explosion. I didn't see 
the second plane hit. I'm looking at your 
schedule here. So it had to be 9:05, 9:06 a.m. 
when I got to the building. 

Q. What did you do next? 

A. We assisted with patient care. We 
assisted trying to get patients treated and 
triaged and transported. Also citywide came on, 
asking to respond up to Park Row. There was a 
unit there that was involved in an MVA. I walked 
up there. I determined the MVA was minor. I 
told the unit, "Just go back to your staging area 
and the paperwork will be taken care of 
afterwards and I reported back down to the 
treatment area." 

Q. Okay. What happened next? 

A. Patients were coming in. I was mainly 
concerned about falling debris. There were 
bodies and body parts falling, but there was also 
parts of the building that were coming down. We 
were starting to think about moving the triage 
area to a safer location, to the lobby of the 
hotel. 

At some point we heard the rumble, and 



W. MELARANGO 5 

the building came down and everybody scrambled. 

Q. You were in front of what building? 

A. The Millennium Hotel. 

Q. The Millennium Hotel. 

At any time did you go into any of the 
World Trade Center buildings prior to their 
collapse? 

A. I tried getting into Five World Trade 
Center to see if there was a triage area 
established in there initially. I couldn't get 
in. There were too many people coming out. So I 
really couldn't get in there. 

Q. What did you do after the first 
collapse? 

A. After the first collapse I had gone 
back down to Church Street because I was 
concerned about two of my crew members that were 
there. They had pulled up in an ambulance, 
vehicle 219. When I got back down to Church 
Street, the vehicle was on fire. I didn't see 
anybody in the truck. I was concerned about the 
oxygen tanks exploding, so I backed off. 

A couple minutes after that a couple 
firemen brought an ESU cop whose arm was badly 



W. MELARANGO 6 

injured. I saw a van and ambulance up on Vesey 
and Church. We brought him over there, and I 
started to dress up his arm. 

At that time a fireman brought a DOA 
over to the ambulance, which I believe was Father 
Doyle. 

Q. Father Judge? 

A. Judge, I'm sorry, Father Judge. 

I was treating the police officer's 
arm. We were wrapping it up when we heard the 
rumble from the second building and it start to 
collapse. We scrambled again. 

Q. Then the second building came down. 

A. The second building came down. I 
didn't go back down to -- I didn't go back down 
to Church Street after that. I went up to 
Broadway by City Hall Park. There was a couple 
of municipal ambulances there which set up a 
temporary treatment area. There were a lot of 
firemen coming to us with debris in their eyes. 

Q. What was this location? 

A. It was right across the street from 
City Hall Park on Broadway by the Duane Reade 
store. I'm not sure what the street is. 



W. MELARANGO 7 

There were two ambulances there, two 
municipal ambulances there. We set up like a 
little mini treatment area. We had several 
firemen come up to us, several police officers. 
We flushed their eyes out, put them on oxygen if 
they were having some trouble breathing. 

After I think maybe about 30, 45 
minutes EMS citywide came up on the air and 
requested a supervisor, if there were any 
supervisors on the air. They made the request 
several times. Nobody answered. I came up on 
the air and told them I was available. 

They asked me to report to -- establish 
a staging area at West Broadway and Chambers, 
which I did. I went up to Broadway and Chambers. 
When I got there, there was approximately maybe 
20, 25 ambulances there mixed: municipal, 
voluntary, volunteer ambulances. We started 
establishing a treatment area there. 

A few minutes after that a police 
officer came up to me and told me that the facade 
in front of Seven World Trade Center was gone and 
they thought there was an imminent collapse of 
Seven World Trade Center. I felt the location we 



W. MELARANGO 8 

were at was too close to Seven World Trade 
Center . 

So we advised citywide we were moving 
the staging area to North End and Greenwich 
Street. 

Q. Okay. 

A. At North End and Greenwich Street we 
established -- myself and Lieutenant Eppinger 
from Battalion 08. 

Q. Approximately what time was this that 
you moved? 

A. Probably around 11, 11:30. We 
reestablished at North End and Greenwich Street. 
We had a new staging area set up over there. 

During the course of the day, assets 
just started showing up at the location. We 
didn't request them; they just started showing 
up. I had two bus loads of doctors and PAs . I 
think they might have just been driving by. I 
don't know. Or else citywide assigned them over 
there. But they came. They came with some 
medical equipment. 

We set up a triage and treatment area 
in front one of the office plazas. We had set up 



W. MELARANGO 9 

a hazmat sector, a morgue sector. It just became 
a larger operation as time went on. At any given 
time I probably had about 40 ambulances. We were 
ready to do even minor surgery at the location. 

A camera crew came up to me, one of the 
production crews from some film company. We 
established and had lights set up in case we were 
going to be operating at night, which was a 
possibility. We also set up some sky lights for 
night . 

We treated approximately maybe 20 
patients, all secondary to the event. They were 
all respiratory. We had some cardiac patients. 
Not directly related to the event. They were 
transported, treated and transported. 

About 10 or 11:00 I went back down to 
the command center at Chambers and West and said 
I thought the assets were not being utilized and 
recommended that they downsize that operation and 
close it down. They agreed. 
Q. What time was this? 

A. About 10 or 11:00 that night. Like I 
said, we treated 20 patients, but that was in the 
first couple of hours that we were there. As 



W. MELARANGO 10 

time went on, we weren't getting any patients at 
our sector. 

So I went down to Chambers and West and 
spoke to Chief Kowalczyk, and I recommended they 
close it down. He concurred. We released the 
ambulances back up to the Chelsea Piers. I also 
had MERV 3 at that location, Queens north. 
Myself and Lieutenant Eppinger and one physician 
and a couple of EMTs were responding to Battery 
Park City at the south end. We stayed there and 
we established -- there was a treatment area 
established . 

Captain Parra was there. We stayed 
there. I was finally relieved around 3:00 in the 
morning . 

Q. Is there anything else you'd like to 
add to this in regard to the events that happened 
from the time the first plane went in to 
approximately 12 noon? 

A. Well, it was just a very large event. 
The EMS assets were just initially overwhelmed 
with patients, so there really wasn't time to get 
a regular ICS going. There were several sectors 
that were established. 



W. MELARANGO 11 

There was very little command and 
control, I felt, in the initial first hour. 
There was no clear incident commander or chain of 
command. I thought there was a lot of 
free-lancing going on, especially there was a lot 
of free-lancing going on with voluntaries that 
belonged to hospitals, private hospitals. A lot 
of these people are not familiar with EMAP and 
the ICS system. So they weren't really reporting 
to anybody. They were just grabbing people to 
and going. 

I think had the incident -- had the 
buildings not come down, the incident would have 
been allowed to work itself out. I think the 
EMAP and ICS would have eventually kicked in. 
There wasn't any time. 

As far as any incidents like this 
again, the preplan staging was that we were 
supposed to stage inside the building and 
establish a forward triage area. It was just a 
very large incident. There just wasn't any time 
to get the ICS and EMAP. 

Q. Is there anything else you'd like to 
add? 



W. MELARANGO 12 

A. No. 

Q. Thank you very much for conducting this 
interview with me. 

MR. ECCLESTON: This interview is going 
to be concluded at 10:32. The counter on 
the tape player is 190. 



File No. 9110046 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMT BRIAN CIRILLO 
Interview Date: October 1 1 , 200 1 



CHRISTOPHER ECCLESTON: Today is October 11, 2001. The time is 9:22 
AM. This is Christopher Eccleston of the New York City Fire Department. lam 
conducting an interview with the following individual. . .please state your name, rank, 
title, and assigned command area of the Fire Department of the City of New York 
regarding the events of September 11, 2001. 

BRIAN CIRILLO: Brian Cirillo, EMT, Battalion 4, 5523 . 

Q: Brian, did you respond to the World Trade disaster on September 11, 
2001? 

A: Yes I did. 

Q: En route to the alarm, what did you see? 

A: En route to the alarm, I saw the first building had been hit by a plane and 
smoke was coming out of the top of the building. So I turned my vehicle around and 
went towards it. 

Q: So you were on your way home? 

A: Yes, correct. 

Q: Correct? So you were in your personal vehicle and you parked your 
vehicle and began to respond on foot? 

A: Correct. 

Q: Okay. Where did you park your car? 

A: I parked my car underneath, right outside the Battery Tunnel exit on the 
Manhattan side. 



Q: On arrival at the World Trade Center, did any civilians report anything to 
you? 

A: No civilians. A firefighter actually approached me and told me they were 
setting up triage across the street while I was in front of the building. And they told me 
they were sitting up triage across the street, so I went over there. 

Q: So whom did you report to when you arrived? 

A: When I went across the street, there was no real commander over there. 
There was a female Lieutenant over there, I never even got the name. She had a 
command board. We would just wait for anyone to come out. Anyone who needed any 
help. 

Q: Were you given a specific assignment? 

A: Not a specific assignment. We were to hold still and wait for the people to 
come out. 

Q: Were you asked to assist any specific units? 

A: No. 

Q: What was the exact location, to the best of your memory, of this staging 
area? 

A: In front of the American Express Building. Westside Highway, more 
towards the divider of the Westside Highway in front of that building? 

Q: Did you ever enter any of the buildings prior to their collapse? 

A: No, I got in front of the building and a firefighter had told me that they 
were setting up triage across the street, so I went over there. 



Q: Okay. Can you tell me what happened next? You were at this staging 
area, what happened after that? 

A: What happened next was we were waiting for people to come out, just 
trying to do whatever we could, just witnessing everything that was going on. People 
trying to get out of the buildings and people actually jumping out of the buildings. After 
maybe 20 minutes, 30 minutes that we were there, one of the buildings came down. 

Q: Where were you when the first building came down? 

A: Same spot. Right in front of the AMEX building. 

Q: And who were you with? 

A: I was with a group of EMTs and paramedics just waiting. No one really 
got anyone's name. We just kind of waited, kind of shocked, not really talking that 
much. 

Q: What happened after the first building came down? 

A: The first building came down, we basically ran up Vesey street towards 
the water. I had to duck behind a car to protect myself from anything falling. Once the 
smoked cleared out a little bit, we got up and started looking for people. We found a few 
people and we set up another triage, I guess on North End. I forget what building, it 
wasn't the Merril Lynch Building, it was the one on the opposite side. We were bringing 
people there, inside the building. It was still running, there was water there, there was a 
big open space that we could feel protected in. 

Q: Okay. 

A: We were just going back and forth to the front of the building, trying to 
take anyone who needed any kind of help, bring them over there. 



Q: Okay. And you continued doing this. . . 

A: We continued doing that until I actually, what happened was, I started 
walking back. I got to pretty much the same spot I was before when we heard the other 
crash and the other building started coming down. And we had to do the same thing we 
did the first time, just take off. I wound up diving into the front of the AMEX building, 
which wasn't great cover cause all the windows had blown out. But it was the first place 
we found. 

Q: Okay. Who were you with? At this point do you know who you were 
with? 

A: I believe around this time, the only man I remember being there, the only 
name I got was Chief Wells. I didn't get anyone else. 

Q: Okay. Did you remove any injured civilians or members of the service? 

A: Yeah, after about 20 or 30 minutes of doing what we were doing, we had 
commandeered an ambulance that was sitting there. It was pretty much the only one still 
intact, and the keys happened to still be in it. We found two firemen and another civilian 
who suffered I guess, smoke inhalation and couldn't breathe very well. We put them in 
there and tried to head uptown to the hospital. 

Q: And this was about what time? You said after the second tower went 
down? 

A: After the second tower went down. After the second tower went down, 
we continued looking, digging through whatever we could dig through. We looked in the 
AMEX building to see if anyone was left in there, went over to the front of the World 
Trade Building, pretty much all that was around us was firefighters. There still was a lot 



of smoke. Across the street happened to be a parking lot. The parking lot seemed to be 
pretty much on fire. Every car in there just looked like it was on fire. There was black 
smoke covering everything. So I couldn't stay that long with no breathing devise. 
Looking for whoever we could find. We happened to find 2, 3. I think three. 

Q: So then you loaded them in an ambulance. Did you have a partner at that 
time? 

A: No, I didn't have a partner. The chief who happened to be there with me 
said take them uptown, to the furthest hospital. Cause what was around was basically 
jam-packed. I did that. I dropped them off. At that time I asked them to flush my eyes 
out with saline solution, and I went back. 

Q: Okay. Did you know what time you got back. . . approximately? 

A: Approximately 2:00. 

Q: About two o'clock? 

A: Yeah. Give or take, you know.. 

Q: Okay, is there anything you would like to add to this, to the events that 
happened prior to 12 noon. 

A Prior to 12 noon? That was after the towers collapsed, no? 

Q: Correct. Well, the North Tower collapsed, which was the second tower at 
10:29. And then you said about 20 minutes later, so that would be a little bit before 11, 
you transported two patients. 

A: Yeah. Give or take, it might have been longer. Well, personally, it was just 
horrible. I felt helpless unfortunately, people who really needed the help were upstairs 



and we couldn't get to them. It was a bad situation all around, I couldn't do anything for 
anyone really. 

Q: Okay, thank you for doing this interview with me. This interview is 
concluded at 9:3 1 hours. The counter on the recorder is at 163. 



File No. 9110047 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMT ALLEN CRUZ 
Interview Date: October 1 1 , 200 1 



A. CRUZ 

CHRISTOPHER ECCLESTON: Today' s date is October 11,2001. 
The time is 10:23 and I am Christopher Eccleston of the New York City Fire 
Department. I am conducting an interview with the following individual. . .please 
state your name, rank, title, assigned command area, shield number of the Fire 
Department of the City of New York regarding the events of September 11, 2001 . 

ALLEN CRUZ: Hi, my name is Allen Cruz. My shield number is 

3361 and I work for the New York City Fire Department, Emergency Medical 
Services and my title is LSU and de-con specialist. 

Q: Were you assigned to the World Trade Center disaster on 
September 11,2001? 

A: Yes, I was. 

Q: En route to the alarm, what did you see? 

A: Well, I got there after the first crash, just before the second crash. 
I went down Fulton Street, and I parked my vehicle on Fulton at the corner of 
Church street. 

Q: Can you indicate on the map where you parked your vehicle with a 
number "1?" 

A: Sure. A number 1? Right here. 

Q: Okay. Upon arrival did any civilians report anything to you? 

A: No, not at all. Everyone was there screaming and running for their 
lives. 



Q: Whom did you first report to when you arrived there? 

A: I reported to no one. 

Q: To no one? 

A: Right. 

Q: What did you do when you arrived there? 

A: When I got there, I couldn't believe what I was seeing. I got to the 
corner of Fulton and Church, I saw a couple of my vehicles parked on Church 
Street, right in front of the World Trade Center. As I exited my vehicle, I saw this 
huge fire up on the building you know? Numerous people running out and 
running up the block towards me, towards my vehicle screaming and hollering in 
panic. 

Q: What did you do next? 

A: I did. . . again, I couldn't believe what I was seeing. I was in shock 
and what I did was I helped some of the people get up off the floor, cause they 
were falling and tripping all over themselves, and I kept telling them to keep on 
running. A lot of people, they thought they were safe. They ran out of the 
building, across the street and like myself, they thought it was just the average 
fire. They proceeded to just stand there and look up, and again, they thought they 
were safe because they had crossed the street by my vehicle. As myself, I thought 
I was safe, and we just stood there in awe, just looking up. Again, while I was 
there looking up, there were still people running and falling and I proceeded to 
run to them, pick them up and shove them and tell them keep running, please, 



keep moving, keep moving. Just stood there like everybody else, just watching 
this unfold. 

Q: Okay, how long did you do this for approximately? 

A: I did that up until the second plane hit. 

Q: When the second plane hit, what did you do? 

A: Well, I was standing, again, helping these people get up, looking 
up, watching these people jump out of the windows. Really, I was in shock. I 
couldn't believe what I was seeing. Or maybe I didn't want to believe what I was 
seeing. As I was standing, there was a bunch of people hiding behind and around 
my vehicle. As we were standing there, this one lady to my left grabbed me really 
really tight, my forearm, my left forearm, and we were both looking up at this 
fire. We both hear this rumble, and I felt a vibration, we looked slightly to the 
left, all of us, there's a whole bunch of us right next to my vehicle, and here 
comes this plane, a huge plane. The lady next to me says Oh my God, it's gonna 
hit the building. I didn't want to give her false information so I said Gee, I don't 
think so, well I hope not. I mean we're looking at it sort of in three dimensions, 
so I'm thinking it's gonna go behind the building. From where we're standing, 
it's gonna go right behind it, but it was too big and far too low. At that moment I 
said it's gonna hit, it's actually gonna hit. And it hit. She screamed, she said oh 
my god. At which point I said everybody just run, and there were some curse 
words. I told everybody you gotta run, run, run. They proceeded to run. I in 
turn, jumped into my vehicle and a whole bunch of debris just came crashing 
down on top of my vehicle at which point I said no, I exited my vehicle, and I too 



ran behind my vehicle. Unbeknownst to me, there were still people hiding not 
only behind, but underneath my vehicle. A few seconds, a few minutes maybe 
went by and we gathered our thoughts and I came out from behind my vehicle and 
I told everyone who was behind my vehicle and in the streets to run, to keep 
running. At which time, I ran towards the building, to Church Street. Some of 
the EMS people were there, and I said, everybody drop what you're doing and 
just get the hell out of here. Run, run, just leave everything, just go, run, run. At 
the same time, there was a lot of debris coming down, and they did. They dropped 
what they were doing, and they just scattered all over the place. Again, people 
were just falling and stumbling, and I kept picking them up and pushing them to 
run. Then I started picking up all the equipment that the guys left behind. I 
started gathering stuff off the street, I started putting it by my vehicle, on the 
street corner. I wanted to compile everything in one neat little corner. Maybe it's 
a habit. That's what I do, that's my job. I retrieve equipment. I didn't want to 
abandon everything, so I started moving all the equipment out of the street, 
towards my side of the street, when the building collapsed. 

Q: This is when the first building collapsed? 

A: Yes. 

Q: Okay. What did you do after the first building collapsed? 

A: I ran like hell. I left everything there and I ran like hell. I ran to 
my vehicle, and I jumped inside. Just as I was about to go into gear, I noticed that 
there were feet underneath my vehicle. So I left it in park, jumped out, and there 
were people still hiding underneath it. At which time I said you people gotta go, 



you cannot stay here, you gotta go. The rumbling's coming down. They got up 
out, I dragged the lady out from underneath, there were still people around and 
behind it, I told them you all gotta run, and they did. At which time the thing 
came down, a big wall of smoke came and I hid behind my vehicle. I just took a 
big breath and just waited for it to pass. 

Q: You stayed there? What happened next? 

A: I don't know how much time elapsed, but it got really dark and I 
couldn't breath. I was covered in soot. Again, I don't know how long it lasted. 

Q: Were you there when the second tower collapsed? 

A: Not in that location, no. 

Q: Okay, where did you go between from when the first tower 
collapsed to the second tower? 

A: I got back in my vehicle when I thought it was safe. Again, I was 
facing Church street. So what I did was, I made a right onto Church, stunned. I 
was stunned, I still could not believe what was happening. 

Q: I'm sure. 

A: I made a left on Vesey. Vesey and Vestry always get me confused. 

Q: You came up, you turned onto Church. . . 

A: Vestry? Vesey. I came down here, I made a left on Vesey. And I 
proceeded to go between number five World Trade and number seven World 
Trade. 

Q: Approximately right here? 



A: I came across here, right. Crossing West Street. Somewhere 
around here, I don't recall. They say I parked somewhere alongside on the right 
side of this street here. There were ambulances all parked on the left, and I 
parked on the right. 

Q: So you parked approximately right here? 

A: Right about, I believe so. 

Q: Which is in front of 7 World Trade Center, is that correct? 

A: No. We passed 7. 

Q: Here's 7. 

A: Oh, 7. Ok, West street. Sorry, forgive me. Here's West. 

Q: This is Vesey. 

A: No, we passed this. Somewhere along this street, before West Side 
Highway. 

Q: Okay, so by the telephone company building? 

A: Yeah, I would have to assume. 

Q: So you were on Vesey Street, just before West. Is that correct? 

A: Just before West. 

Q: So you were approximately right here? 

A: Yeah. 

Q: Okay. The map is gonna indicate a 2 where the LSU is moved to 
next. Correct? 

A: Yeah. 

Q: Okay, after you got there. . . 



A: Would this be North End Street here, the West Side Highway? 

Q: This would be the West Side Highway. 

A: Okay. 

Q: North End is over here 

A: Okay, I got it. Right about there. 

Q: So after you parked there, the first tower has already come down. 
The second tower has not come down yet, is that correct? 

A: Right, that is correct. 

Q: You parked here, what did you do next? 

A: Here, again, I don't recall. 

Q: Do your best. 

A: Again, there was a bunch of guys there. There was a bunch of 
guys there. All of the ambulances, like seven of them parked on one side of the 
street and I was on the other side. Again, I was the only vehicle parked there. We 
came out, we couldn't believe what was happening. We started to treat people, 
they were treating people here. I recall that. Then somebody said run, the other 
building's gonna fall. Again, I don't know. I don't recall if the other building fell 
at this point, or as we left. There's a moment there where I don't remember. 

Q: To the best of your memory, I don't want to pressure you. 

A: I think they said to move cause there's a threat of the building 
falling, or a threat of another plane. They said another plane was gonna hit, so 
run. So we proceeded, everyone got into their vehicles and we proceeded to go 
up to West End Street. The Lieutenant was standing there facing the units. 



Everyone got into their vehicles and we abandoned that area. There was a threat 
of the building falling, or another plane was gonna hit. We proceeded towards 
North End Street. 

Q: North End, okay, this is North End Street. 

A: As we approached the Lieutenant, he had all the vehicles. He was 
telling them all to go to the left, go to the left. He told me to go to the right, 
which is towards North End I guess, by the marina. There's a marina there 
somewhere. 

Q: The marina would be right here. 

A: Okay, so we came up here, this street. Everybody went this way, 
and I went that way. Right over here somewhere, cause I remember there's a 
building in front of us. 

Q: So right here on North End, just south of Vesey is where you 
parked your vehicle next? 

A: Yes. 

Q: Okay, the map is gonna indicate with a number 3 where your LSU 
was parked next. Okay, so now you parked over here, has the second tower come 
down yet? Or you're not sure? If you're not sure that's fine. 

A: A building came down, only I don't know if it was number 7 or 
number 2. 

Q: Okay, number 7 didn't come down till much later. 

A: So then it was number 2 that came down. 

Q: So then number 2 came down. . . 



10 

A: Yeah. Well, it didn't come down that time. The guys were setting 
up triage at some hotel over here, and we were treating people here. We were 
treating an awful lot of people here. 

Q: On North End, just south of Vesey, you were treating people? 

A: As we were doing that, somebody said, there's another plane. 
That's it, another plane is coming, another plane is gonna crash. We heard this 
rumble, that's when the building came down. We all thought it was a plane. 
Everybody just, firefighters, myself, we were treating people, everybody just 
threw themselves down to the floor, and they hid all around my vehicle. You 
know, anything they could find, they just threw themselves down. We actually 
thought it was another plane. That's right. That's when the other building came 
down. Because we heard the rumble (BOOM). Just crashing down, I thought it 
was another plane. Yeah, exactly, that's what happened. 

Q: Tower two came down, then what happened next? What did you 
do? What did you see? 

A: Tower 2 came down, everybody evacuated the hotel area where 
they had the temporary triage center. Everybody got in their vehicle. Actually, 
they didn't get in their vehicles, they ran. Everybody just evacuated. They said 
run, clear, and everybody just took off. I again, stood. I stood there. I went to 
the hotel, it was empty. See, I wouldn't leave the vehicle cause I have to stay 
with that vehicle at all times. I have all the extra equipment in case the guys need 
something. Plus, my portable radio was going dead. If they needed me, I needed 
to be on the air, so what I kept doing was going into my vehicle and monitoring 



11 

the radio in my vehicle, instead of my portable, so I kept switching back and 
forth. The building came down, everyone took off, I hid behind my vehicle. I hid 
outside my vehicle, I was looking up this street here. 

Q: Up Vesey Street? 

A: Vesey. I just saw this huge ball of smoke coming at me. So I was 
trying to time it. I was trying to wait for it and time it. I escaped the first one, so I 
figured, okay, no sweat. I took a deep breath, get down, and just wait for it to 
pass. But unbeknownst to me, I'm looking up the street her, I hear this rumbling 
sound coming from behind me. As I'm crouched down, and as I turned around, I 
see this huge ball of smoke coming. I didn't expect it to come from behind me. It 
came around the building, and it came from behind me, so it kind of caught me 
off guard. So I just laid myself down on the floor, by the tire, I took a deep breath 
and I just waited. It blew past me, and I waited a few seconds. I found my door, I 
couldn't see anything. I found my door, and I jumped into my vehicle. While 
doing so, I bumped my head up against the steering wheel. So I crouched myself 
underneath my steering wheel, by the pedals, and I just crouched and waited. I 
don't know how long, but I just waited there until I was able to see light. Then I 
got out of my vehicle, there was people still scurrying around, but it was 
somewhat deserted, very dismal. I walked over to the temporary triage center, 
and there was absolutely nobody, not even anybody in the hotel, in the lobby. A 
moment ago there was people there, but now there was nobody. There was like, 
seven vehicles parked in front, and no body. So everybody ran towards Chambers 
Street. 



12 

Q: So they ran North on North End Street, towards Chambers? 

A: Right, then at this point, I noticed that some of the vehicles had 
their ignition keys still in the ignition. So I jumped in the vehicle, I turned it on, 
and I drove it to where everybody was staging at Chambers Street. Then I walked 
all the way back, got another vehicle, and took it over there and parked it. Came 
back, the third vehicle wouldn't start, it had the keys in it and it was dead. So I 
walked back to my truck, my LSU and I went straight over to where that vehicle 
was, took out my cables, and I jumped it, jump started it. I legally parked my 
vehicle, to this day it bothers me, cause the street was deserted. Instead of just 
leaving my vehicle there once I got that vehicle started, I actually got into my 
vehicle and legally parked it. I proceeded to move that vehicle, I jumped it. I 
moved two, I jumped two. Then all the other people were here. 

Q: Other people were on Chambers and North End? 

A: Yeah. Then one of the fellows that was here said that he had left 
his vehicle in front of mine, vehicle 240. I remember seeing it in front of me. So 
I said okay, give me your keys and I'll go and get your vehicle. He said please 
don't got there, don't go, it's dangerous. I said look, you need the vehicle, I'll go 
get it for you. I can walk faster than you it's no big deal, it's no problem, I will 
handle it. He gave me the keys and I walked all the way back and I got his 
vehicle. Actually, I didn't get his vehicle. When I got to his vehicle, he had 
given me the wrong key. That pissed me off. I had to walk all the way back to 
him, that was his vehicle. I said look, you gave me the wrong damn key, at which 
point he said I'm going with you. I said okay, fine. So we both walked all the 



13 

way back, he got into his vehicle, I got into mine, and I waited for him to start his 
vehicle up in case he needed my help, in case he needed my jump. He got it 
started, the lights came on, he made a U-turn, he pulled out, and I pulled out with 
him. We all met at Chambers Street. 

Q: Do you know about what time this was that you finally got up 
there? 

A: Honestly, no sir. I could not tell you. The time I couldn't tell you. 

Q: I'm sure it was all a blur. 

A: Yeah, I was lost for time. I didn't think of looking at my watch or 
nothing. 

Q: After you got to Chambers and North End, what did you do up 
there? 

A: At which time I proceeded down Chambers Street and I parked my 
vehicle on the corner of Chambers and West. 

Q: Okay. Right here? 

A: Chambers and West Street, right on this side of the street. 
Actually, I parked it right in front of I think it was the BMCC College. 

Q: Okay, so the number 4 indicates where your vehicle was parked 
next, on West and Chambers. When you got there, what happened next? 

A: I stood there with my vehicle, I stood there and I started watching 
this whole operation unfold. Units started coming, vehicles started coming, 
bosses started coming, Police Department, Fire Department, people started 
coming. They just all convened on that one corner. I just stood there and 



14 

watched that whole operation unfold. Every time when my EMS people came— 
the command truck came and the chiefs came, I reported to them, I said look, I'm 
parked over here. I said if you need anything, I got the LSU parked on this 
corner. They said okay, what I need from you Allen (that was my chief) is I need 
the table that we have that they can write stuff, I have that table. 

Q: Like, the command board? 

A: Exactly. I went to my vehicle, I got it, I gave it to him. For the 
next thirty- something hours, I just stood with my truck right there in that corner. 
I was there until Wednesday, the next day. 

Q: Wow, that's along time. Is there anything else you would like to 
add to this, anything else you would like to tell me about the events that happened 
up until about noon that day? 

A: Nothing that you haven't already heard or seen, or felt for yourself. 
I mean there was nothing to really say to describe this whole catastrophe. It's 
really hard to describe to be perfectly honest,, I mean to see this happening, it's 
really hard to describe. No, I can honestly tell you, eighteen years plus on this 
job, and I've seen the worst the city has to offer. But nothing to this magnitude. 
The feeling was so overwhelming. It was an incredible thing, I'm really lost for 
words at this time. I really am, forgive me. 

Q: No, please, no forgiveness necessary. I thank you very much for 
allowing me to conduct this interview. 

A: You're very welcome. 

Q: The time is 1 1 :44, the counter on the tape player is at 322. 



File No. 9110048 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMT PATRICIA ONDROVIC 
Interview Date: October 1 1 , 200 1 



P. ONDROVIC 



CHRISTOPHER ECCLESTON: Today' s date is October 11,2001. The time 
is 6:48 AM, and this is Christopher Eccleston of the New York City Fire Department. I 
am conducting an interview with the following individual. . .please state your name, rank, 
title, and assigned command area of the Fire Department of the City of New York, 
regarding the events of September 11, 2001. 

PATRICIA ONDROVIC: Patricia Ondrovic, shield 1634, EMTD, assigned to 
Battalion 8. 



2001? 



Q: Were you assigned to the World Trade Center disaster on September 11, 

A: Yes. 

Q: En route to the alarm, what did you see? 

A: I saw the two towers burning. 

Q: On arrival, did any civilians report anything to you? 

A: No. 

Q: Where did you park your vehicle when you arrived? 

A: In the middle of Vesey Street between West and whatever is East of 



Vesey. 

Q: On this map, can you indicate with a number 1 where you parked your 
vehicle? 

A: Um. . . it was on Vesey between West and the West Side Highway so, it 
was, I'm not sure if it was this block or that block. 



P. ONDROVIC 

Q: Okay, just approximate and put a number 1 . 

A: I guess it was over here. 

Q: Okay, and what vehicle were you in? 

A: Vehicle 90. 

Q: Vehicle 90. Whom did you first report to and where? 

A: On Vesey and West, in the middle of the block, there was an EMS captain. 
I never got his name, I don't know who he was. I said I was 07 Charlie, he said park it 
over there. That was the last I saw of him. 

Q: Were you given a specific assignment? 

A: No. Stand by. Take the equipment out of the vehicle and stand by. 

Q: Were you asked to assist any specific units? 

A: No. 

Q: Can you tell me what you did when you arrived at that location? 

A: We took the stretcher and all the crash equipment out of the bus and we 
formed up alongside one of the buildings on Vesey. I don't remember which number it 
was. We were in a line of several other ambulances. Next to us was a St. Claire's 
ambulance and a Cabrini Ambulance. I think there was only one other EMS ambulance 
on that block at the time I was there. That was vehicle 350, 08 David. I didn't know a lot 
of the people there, I didn't know the EMS captain that was there. There were no 
patients that we could see at that point. I think they were trying to set up a triage in front 
of the building that the ambulances were all parked at. I guess we were supposed to be 



P. ONDROVIC 

the first on the wave to take patients out, and there was a Tex-Mex restaurant across the 
street. I went in to use the bathroom, that's where the Police were using their command 
center. I saw a police captain that I knew, and he came out to me. He looked absolutely 
terrified, he was shaking, he was pale, he was sweating. I looked at him, I said what's 
wrong? He said there's another plane headed our way, and they just blew up the 
Pentagon. I said, another plane? What are you talking about? I hadn't realized that 
planes had hit this, I thought they just set bombs off. I didn't realize when I got there that 
planes hit it. I said, what do you mean another plane? He said two planes hit the World 
Trade Center. So I'm thinking a little Cessena. How can a little Cessena do all that 
damage? He said no, 757s. I said big things? See I was there for about 25 minutes 
before I knew that planes had crashed into this. We just got assigned to do stand-by. We 
didn't know what the stand-by was. I mean, who thinks something like that? You just 
think they hit it again. So I said, what do you mean there's another one headed this way? 
He said, it's on the TV, there's a TV in there and it said that the Pentagon has been hit. 
Then we all went outside cause they had on the police radio that there was another plane 
headed in our direction, we all went outside and started looking up in the sky. Then the 
EMS captain said everyone grab your equipment, get to your vehicles and stay with your 
vehicles. My partner and I grabbed our stretcher, went to put it in the back of our 
vehicle, and at that time, I think it was the lobby of the building behind us blew out. 
Everybody started running, I didn't see him again that day. He got thrown one way, I got 



P. ONDROVIC 

thrown the other way. I started running towards the West Side Highway, and there was 
another building on the corner, I guess it was a federal building, cause it was all the green 
and gray uniforms with the Smokey the Bear hats, the cops in there. I went to run in the 
lobby cause all of a sudden you couldn't see anything. There was smoke, there was 
debris, there was everything flying around. I ran into the lobby cause I had no idea what 
had happened and the cops that were in there were telling everybody get out, get out, get 
out. Where are you gonna go? Stuff s blowing up. So I ran back out and I started 
running west again. At that point, there was a car on the corner of I think I was here at 
that point, on the West Side Highway. 

Q: West Side Highway and Vesey? 

A: And Vesey, yeah. I was still on Vesey, cause the building that blew up on 
me was on Vesey, it was on the corner next to the West Side Highway. Cause I know I 
was running west, I didn't run that way. Thank God, I would have been dead had I run 
the other way. But I ran towards the West Side Highway, and I kept running up Vesey. 
As I was running up Vesey, the first car blew up on me on the corner of Vessey and the 
West Side Highway. That set my turnout coat on fire, that set my hair on fire, and that 
set my feet on fire. I kept running. I got news for you, those turn out coats need to be 
called burn out coats, cause this thing caught up in flames. They cut two inches off my 
hair in less that two minutes, my coat was completely engulfed, and that was the only 
way I could see where I was running at that point, because I had a glow from my coat. 



P. ONDROVIC 

There's hundreds of cops all running up there, and I ended up running through this park, 
and I couldn't even see where I was running anymore. I kept running North. 

Q : Through North Park? 

A: I guess that's North Park. It's a big green, grassy area, and there's nothing 
there. As I was running up here, two or three more cars exploded on me. They weren't 
near any buildings at that point, they were just parked on the street. The traffic guys 
hadn't gotten a chance to tow anything yet, cause this was all during the first hour I guess 
of this thing happening. So there were still cars parked on the street that were completely 
independent of that. Three cars blew up on me, stuff was being thrown. I went home all 
bruised that day. Thank God it was only bruises. I just ran into this park along with a 
bunch of other people, and stuff was still blowing up, I don't think I looked back, but you 
couldn't see anything, everything was just black. I was running and I was falling over 
people, cause people were crawling on the ground cause they couldn't see anymore. I 
just kept on running north. I could smell water, so I just kept on running towards the 
water, cause I knew that my coat was on fire, and I figured well, if I can see a boat over 
the water, I'm just gonna jump onto the boat and take that thing to Jersey, cause no one 
wants to blow up Jersey. Stuff is still blowing up behind me, as I'm running. I can hear 
stuff exploding. I could hear rumbling, the street under me was moving like I was in an 
earthquake. I've been in those, so I know what they feel like. It felt like an earthquake. 
There was no where safe to go. As I was running north in this park, and then I could start 
seeing again a little bit, and I just kept looking in the sky. Cause the captain was saying 



P. ONDROVIC 

there's another plane heading in our direction, I was looking for another plane. I saw 
something in the sky, it was a plane, but it was way out. It looked like it was over Jersey 
or something, then it wasn't there anymore. I saw a small fireball, and it was gone. I saw 
two other planes. One came in one way, and the other came in the other way, and there 
was a plane in the middle that was way far off in the distance. Then the plane in the 
middle just disappeared into a little fire ball. It looked like the size of a golf ball from 
where I could see it. And the other two planes veered off into opposite directions. I just 
kept on running north. About fifteen blocks later, I had no idea that that was just the first 
tower that had come down. I had no idea at that time that that's what that was, and the 
other buildings were being affected, of course, by that building falling. I found another 
ambulance, I believe it was the 08 Adam, because it was Valdivia and Jose Perez. Joseph 
Valdivia used to be my partner on tour 3, and when I finally caught up to them, I told 
them what was happening. I told them whatever you do, don't go back that way cause 
they just blew up triage. I thought that they blew up our triage sector, cause that's where 
the command was and everything. That was the only thing that I had to go by, everybody 
that was there was gone. Cause a couple of the police officers that are now missing are 
guys that I had known, and that's where they were. The paramedic from Cabrini, that's 
where he was. I was just talking to him 20 minutes before everything blew up. I don't 
know where he ran, I don't know if he ran the wrong way, cause I know I ran the right 
way. If you ran the opposite way, you were dead. As I got like 15, 20 blocks away, now 
I'm on the West Side Highway cause I came out of this park and I found the other 



P. ONDROVIC 

ambulance. I saw my ex-partner, and I said get in this thing and drive it to Westchester. 
I told him get the hell out of the city. Get everyone was can get in this, I said shit's still 
blowing up down there. Whatever you do, don't go in that direction, start driving north. 
He was like, looking at me like I was insane. Cause I don't know if anyone saw what had 
happened. All you could see was black smoke and that's all I can see at that point. Now 
I'm in an area where all the reporters are coming up to me and asking what had 
happened, and I said I don't thinking I'm allowed to talk about it. Cause I don't know 
what happened, and I wasn't gonna tell anybody. You know, it was surreal, like it wasn't 
really happening. So then an EMS Lieutenant comes over, he sees me standing with 8 
Adam, and he says okay, you guys are gonna go three blocks south. I looked at him, and 
I said are you out of your mind? I found another guy from 8 David, Charles Gschlecht 
and we found each other as we were running. He couldn't find his partner, and I couldn't 
find mine, so we kind of synched up together, cause at least we knew each other and it's 
like, okay, we're okay. He said I can't find my partner. I said I can't find mine either, I 
think he got blown the wrong way. This guy was telling me that his partner went back in 
to help somebody, and that was the last we saw of either of them for awhile. That was 
the last I saw my partner for six whole days, cause I didn't come back to work after that. 

Q: Who was the lieutenant you saw, do you know? 

A: Yeah, Bobby Deleon. Bobby Deleon comes up to me, and I know him 
cause he used to be a union rep up in the Bronx when I worked up there a million years 



P. ONDROVIC 

ago, he tells us to take the vehicle, put me and Charles in the back of the vehicle and go 
three blocks south. Charles told him, are you out of your mind? We're not safe where 
we are, let alone three blocks south. Yeah, yeah , yeah, I know, I know. Get in the 
ambulance and go three blocks south. At that point I got really upset. I said, do you 
realize they just blew up our triage sector? Everybody back there is dead, everybody 
back there is gone. There is no reason for us to go back there, we don't have the proper 
protective equipment, we don't have the proper vehicles. There's no way I'm going back 
there, there's no reason to go back. Yeah , yeah, yeah, I know, don't be hysterical, just 
go back three blocks south. I'm not going three blocks south, he's not going three blocks 
south, this ambulance is not going three blocks south. Sean started telling him we're not 
safe where we are now, and we were fifteen blocks away. It was certainly not safe there. 
He was the whole time saying. . . cause at that point I was screaming at him, cause he 
wasn't in there. We were telling him what we saw, and he just wouldn't listen. Yeah, 
yeah, I know. 



Il still 



hadn't realized that the first tower had fallen 




After I found out what actually 



10 
P. ONDROVIC 

happened, cause I found that out about a week ago, that that's what I ran from. So then, I 
think it was an EMS chief, I'm not sure who it was. Now more people were starting to 
come to this location, and he says okay, here's what we're gonna do. . .everybody's gonna 
go back down that way on the West Side Highway, and it's okay cause we have a police 
escort. 

Q: Back south? 

A: Back south on the West Side Highway, it's be okay cause we have a 
police escort. I don't want any free-lancing, we're all gonna go back in a nice orderly 
fashion. At that point my chest started to hurt, I couldn't breathe cause all I was 
breathing in was this black crap, I started coughing up all this black crap, all this stuff 
that looked like goo, and if I had to run another 15 blocks, I would have been dead. 
There was no way I could do it. I saw Lieutenant Hanlon, who is a lieutenant out of this 
station at that point, and I sat in the back of the ambulance. I started getting really scared, 
and really upset, cause people were telling me to go back in and die. There was nothing 
else they were telling me to do at that point, cause that was all that was gonna happen. 
So I sat in the back of the ambulance, I was coughing up, I was coughing up. Everyone 
kept asking me do you want oxygen? I was like no, I don't want it to get pushed down, I 
want to bring it up. I took some cold water, I put it on my face, I tried to cough up into it, 
and my chest really started hurting. Then my left arm started hurting, then the whole left 
side of my body started hurting, and I was like no, there's no way this is gonna happen. 
Lieutenant Hanlon came over to me and said are you okay? I said no, and I don't 



11 
P. ONDROVIC 

know where my partner is. At that point I was crying cause I had no idea where my 
partner was, I thought I was having a goddamn heart attack, and these people are telling 
me to go back in. So then when this EMS chief said what we're gonna do I said no, I 
have chest pain, I want to go to the hospital. So 8 Adam took me to the hospital, they 
took me to St. Vincent's. At the time we were setting up, getting ready to take me out, 
they took my blood pressure, which was a little high at the time, it's never been before in 
my life, but I think that's a good time for it to be high. 

Q: Did you take something? 

A: They put me on oxygen, put me in the stretcher. As they put me in the 
stretcher, somebody came over the EMS radio, said that the North Tower is leaning. As 
we started driving off, we saw the second tower fall. As we're driving away, debris is 
hitting the back of the ambulance. We were now about 20 blocks away, debris was 
hitting the back of the ambulance as we were watching this thing come down, it was just 
this huge cloud. It was me and Jose Perez in the back of the bus saying, I can't believe 
we're seeing this. When we saw the towers start coming, I took the oxygen off my face, 
me and Jose are yelling up to the front to Joe just drive. Put your foot on the floor and 
drive, drive as fast as you can out of here, it's coming down. Joe was like, I know I see 
it, and he had his foot on the floor, which meant we were going 30 miles an hour. Stuff 
was still hitting the back of the ambulance. All I kept thinking of is if this much crap is 
hitting the back of the bus and we're 20 blocks away, this lieutenant wanted us to go 3 
blocks south, and I'm thinking what happened to everybody who listened to this chief 



12 



P. ONDROVIC 



and went back? I don't even know if they got a chance to go back. You know? Also, 
after I was running, I remember running, and I remember somebody yelling on the radio 
May Day, May Day, I'm trapped! Over the EMS radio. I was thinking May Day? That's 
not a term we use, you know 10-13 or 85 forthwith, but somebody's yelling May Day, 
I'm trapped. Then you heard this loud buzz, and you didn't hear anymore transmissions 
after that until I would venture to guess it was 20 minutes to a half our later, and the first 
thing I remember hearing was somebody saying the North Tower is leaning. Within five 
minutes of that statement, the second tower came down. I spent the rest of my day at St. 
Vincent's hospital. 

Q: Okay, is there anything else you would like to add to this? 

A: I don't know if it matters, but I took the next three days off after that. I 
didn't go on | 




I was 



okay with it until the lieutenant wouldn't listen to me, and would not understand that it 
was dangerous to go back in. He wouldn't accept that from me or the other guy that was 
with me. So I took the next three days off sick. During that time I went to see two 
counselors, one that was set-up by the union. Cause needless to say, like everyone else in 
the city, I did not sleep, I was having nightmares, I think the first full meal I ate was 
about last week. 

|. Then I went to go see an internist cause I started walking down the street 



13 



P. ONDROVIC 



and all of a sudden, I couldn't breathe. I was trying to get back in the swing of things, | 



His statements to two of my co-workers, as well 
as a lieutenant was, it's part of the job. If I can't handle the job, I shouldn't have it. I 
don't think what any of us responded to that day was part of anyone's job, let alone ours. 
That was a military operation. Of course, what are you gonna do? It could have been my 
day off. I could have been shopping at Border's Books. 





|. I don't think anyone's ever been exposed to 
something like this before here. Of course not, but we all know EMS has a high rate of 
suicide. Not saying that that's gonna be my case cause no, I refuse, I wouldn't let 
anybody push me to that corner. 

Q: I'm glad to hear that. 



14 



P. ONDROVIC 

A: But, this is what happens. This is one of the reasons that I pushed up my 
resignation date a lot quicker. Cause I was trying to hold out for another 8 months, as 
soon I can get another job I'm the hell outta here. It's not because of this event, cause 
other events like this will happen whether I'm on duty or off, it's the way I've been 
treated since. 

Q: I thank you very much for speaking to me, the time is 7:08 and this 
concludes the interview. 



File No. 9110054 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMT DECOSTA WRIGHT 
Interview Date: October 11, 2001 



Transcribed by Elisabeth F. Nason 



D. WRIGHT 

MS. BASTEDENBECK: Today's date is October 

11, 2001. The time is 1531 hours. I'm Christine 

Bastedenbeck of the New York City Fire Department, 

conducting an interview with EMT DeCosta Wright at 

Battalion 31. 

Q. He will introduce himself now. 

A. I am DeCosta Wright, EMT Wright, at Battalion 
31. 

Q. What unit and Battalion, are you assigned to 
Battalion 31, what unit? 

A. I was working on 31 Adam. 

Q. Tell me what you remember about the events of 
September 11, 2001. 

A. Basically I was working in a unit. It was 
about 8:50 when we got the call. It came over the 
computer as a fire at the World Trade Center. So at 
first we got the call, we rushed to it and I didn't 
believe it at first until we got on the bridge. Then I 
saw it in flames. I said oh, my god. I couldn't 
believe it. It was unreal. Everything was so unreal. 

So we just tried our best to get through 
traffic to get there. When we finally got there, we 
staged on the West Side Highway right in front of the 
first tower, and the building was in flames, the first 



D. WRIGHT 

building was in flames. Basically we took all our 
equipment out and ready to see how many patients there 
were, you know, that was on the scene. We seen all the 
firemen run into the building. 

Q. Did you report to a Lieutenant? Do you know 
who it was when you first got there? 

A. No, I'm not sure which Lieutenant. 

Q. But you reported to a Lieutenant? 

A. Yes, it was just -- basically, we were just 
so much in awe about the whole thing. The building 
continued burning. All of a sudden I seen a couple of 
people jumping out. But before that, some debris came 
down, was coming down. Large pieces of metal just 
flying down. If that thing would have hit anybody, 
that would have decapitated somebody, but it floated 
all the way towards us and then it went into the 
building next to us and broke the windows . 

That was one part that I remember. After 
that, that's when we started seeing people starting to 
jump out. It was total -- that was unreal, I tell you, 
to see people jump from the top floor. A few minutes 
later, we had seen the second plane just come in, go 
right through the second building. 

So we couldn't believe it, because we thought 



D. WRIGHT 

the first one was an accident. So then right after 
that we knew it was terrorism. So after that, after 
the second plane hit, it was just raining people, 
people were just jumping. When the first one hit, they 
were just jumping periodically. You would see one man 
jump out. I was in -- in our position, we could 
actually see when they hit the ground and I seen body 
parts just going everywhere when they hit the ground, 
so when one guy hit, all you hear was boom, then you 
see his arms and legs, just flew right off. 

Then right after that I see a woman, she was 
just spinning in the air. After that, when the second 
plane hit, that's when my partner was like -- he 
couldn't believe my reaction, because all I was saying, 
all these people that was jumping out. I was just 
saying oh, my god, oh, my god. I couldn't believe -- I 
was like oh, my god. I couldn't believe. It was so 
unreal . 

Then a few minutes later, we hear all this 
rumbling, sounded like an earthquake. Somebody said 
the building is coming down. So everybody is just 
screaming. We ran into the -- 
Q. On the map. 
A. Right next to us, the Merrill Lynch 



D. WRIGHT 

building. Yes, we ran into the Merrill Lynch 
building. That building was shaking. Everybody was 
just screaming, and I thought that building was coming 
down too, because of the way it was just -- the shaking 
and everybody just -- so everybody thought they were 
going to die. Everybody actually -- I thought that was 
it. I thought that was the end. 

So we ran into the basement of that building, 
everybody. Then after we -- after the rumbling 
stopped, we came out the building. 

Q. Do you remember who ran into the building 
with you, who was with you when you ran into the 
building? 

A. There was a lot of people, so many people, 
that's when everybody split up. I didn't see my 
partner. That was then. I didn't see my partner 
nowhere. So I walked outside and was engulfed in smoke 
and a lot of asbestos and stuff. I walked around, I 
couldn't see nothing. I wanted to see what happened. 
The building collapsed. So I walked to that site and 
it was like totally deserted. I was by myself at that 
time. I don't know where anybody was. It was so 
unreal. I walked and basically you couldn't see your 
hand in front of you. 



D. WRIGHT 

As I got closer to that site, all I heard was 
moaning and some people that were lying down near the 
site, near the rubble. They were bleeding. I seen a 
lot of people bleeding from the mouth, the nose, they 
was calling on me, help me, help me. I had no 
equipment, my bus is gone. My bus is covered. They 
was just screaming help me. There is nothing I could 
do for them, except for those firemen that was out 
there that was just walking around, I mean just in 
total awe and like, god, man, they didn't know where 
they were. They had blood everywhere but you know, 
they were walking wounded. 

It's crazy how they were just walking around, 
like they didn't know where they were. I was basically 
at that time I was grabbing them and bringing them to 
safety and -- 

Q. Where did you bring them to? 

A. There was a building. There was another 
staging area. We were bringing sick people, people 
that was injured. There was a paramedic that was under 
a vehicle in the rubble. I went back to the site. We 
got a stretcher. We ran and got him. He was alive. 
He wasn't injured. 

Q. Do you know who he was? 



D. WRIGHT 

A. I forgot his name. It will come back to me. 

Q. Does he work at this station? 

A. Yes, he is at this station. Anyway, he was 
coughing. He really couldn't get his breath. He was 
totally covered in soot and all, and he totally 
breathed it in, so when we brought him to that triage 
area -- 

Q. Do you know where that triage area was? 

A. I'm not sure. It was right around the 
corner . 

Q. If you looked on the map would that help you 
or not really? 

A. It was right there. It was this building. I 
think it was this building. 

Q. You brought him into a building where there 
was triage? 

A. This building. 

Q. Was it the American Express building on the 
corner of Vesey? 

A. I think it was by the water. I think it was 
the American Express building. Yes, it had to be. 

Q. That's where you brought him? 

A. Brought him in there. Then he was basically 
coughing. He was vomiting and after he started getting 



D. WRIGHT 

better, you know, he wanted to get up and he was -- so 
I gave him some water, oxygen, you know, he didn't want 
-- he just wanted to go back out there. 

So after I seen that he was all right by 
himself, I went back out there. So the same scenario, 
those guys, firemen walking around the scene. You seen 
Lieutenants, all this big brass walking around, 
everybody, just in la-la land. So basically I was 
there, just still doing the same thing. Trying to get 
then to safety. 

Then all of a sudden, that earthquake sound 
again and I knew what it was, you know. The second 
building was coming down. Since I heard that sound, I 
knew, so I started running. That's one of the things 
-- one of the reasons that I couldn't sleep, because 
there were still people there alive. I don't know if 
they were buried in the second one. There was people 
that are screaming to me. Help me, patients that was 
there that we couldn't do anything about. 

Then we heard that second rumble and I just 
started running, you know. That cloud just was chasing 
me. Of course I got cornered. After that cleared, as 
a matter of fact, I ran into the same building, where 
we was triaging. 



D. WRIGHT 

After that I didn't go back there. I 
couldn't go back. 

Q. Did you stay in the American Express 
building? 

A. Stayed there, then I went to, as a matter of 
fact, the Lieutenants there, they wouldn't let anybody 
go back. They sent me with some patients to the 
hospitals. Like I said, I was split up. I didn't have 
a partner at that time. I didn't know how I was going 
to get home, you know, back to my station. 

At that time that was basically it. After I 
went to the hospital, came back to -- there was another 
staging area, it was on -- it was way up on the West 
Side Highway. There was like a thousand ambulances. 

Q. Was it the Chelsea Pier? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Or Pier 94? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Which one? 

A. I'm not sure . 

Q. You don't remember? 

A. (inaudible) . 

Q. Okay. 

A. There was a lot of ambulances there. I met 



10 
D. WRIGHT 



up with a couple of guys from my station. 

Q. Who were they? Do you remember their names? 

A. There was Andre. 

Q. Cherrington? 

A. Cherrington, and his partner. That was the 
one that was in the rubble. He came back. 

Q. Andre's partner that day? 

A. Yes, what's him name? 

Q. Suarez? 

A. No. 

Q. Smiley? 

A. Smiley. It was me, Andre, Smiley, and who 
else did we have there? I don't remember who else. It 
was me, Andre and Smiley. 

Q. Did you ever find your partner that day? 

A. No. 

Q. Who were you working with that day? 

A. Jackson. Then after that, as a matter of 
fact, that was about 4 hours later we met up. Then we 
went back, me and Jackson went back. We didn't have 
our ambulance, that was what it was. Our ambulance was 
still in the rubble, so we didn't have no ambulance, so 
we had to split up while we were still together. 

Then we went back to the site. We was on -- 



11 

D. WRIGHT 



we went to a different staging area. We was by -- let 
me see that map. We were right in front of -- what was 
the last building that collapsed? 

Q. 7? 

A. We was right there. That was building 7. 

Q. You were at a triage area there or -- 

A. We made our own triage area. There was a 
couple of more ambulances, like 4 ambulances. 

Q. You were in another vehicle then when you 
went over there? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Do you remember what vehicle number it was? 

A. No. 

Q. Okay. 

A. So that was basically -- we watched that one 
come down. It was on fire first. I think the fourth 
floor was on fire. They said -- we were like, are you 
guys going to put that fire out? I was like, you know, 
they are going to wait for it to burn down and it 
collapsed. So that's when I knew high rise buildings, 
you know, (inaudible) . 

Q. Were you there when building 7 came down in 
the afternoon? 

A. Yes. 



12 
D. WRIGHT 



Q. You were still there? 

A. Yes, so basically they measured out how far 
the building was going to come, so we knew exactly 
where we could stand. 

Q. So they just put you in a safe area, safe 
enough for when that building came down? 

A. 5 blocks. 5 blocks away. We still could 
see. Exactly right on point, the cloud just stopped 
right there. Then when that building was coming down, 
the same thing, that same rumbling. That's why I like, 
for a couple of weeks, every little sound that I 
heard. It was unreal. 

Q. What time did you finally get off that day? 

A. Got off, left at 11 o'clock. 

Q. At night from over there? 

A. Yes. 

Q. And came back here? 

A. 11 o'clock. 

Q. Anything else you want to add or -- 

A. No. 

MS. BASTEDENBECK: This concludes my 

interview with DeCosta Wright. The time is now 

1550 hours . 



File No. 9110056 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
PARAMEDIC GEORGE BURBANO 
Interview Date: October 11, 2001 



Transcribed by Elisabeth F. Nason 



G . BURBANO 

MR. TAMBASCO: Today is October 11. The time 
is 1449 hours. My name is Mike Tambasco assigned 
to the World Trade Center Task Force. I'm here 
conducting an interview with Paramedic George 
Burbano in regards to the events of September 11 
at the World Trade Center. 

Q. Mr. Burbano, I just ask you to give me your 
name, rank and then tell me your story. 

A. My name is George Burbano. I'm a Paramedic, 
Battalion 22 on Staten Island. 

Q. Just feel free to tell me what happened from 
the beginning to the end. 

A. That morning I left BHS, I left headquarters 
at sometime around 8:20, 8:30 in the morning. I was 
going into Manhattan. 

Q. You weren't on duty, right? 

A. I wasn't on duty initially, no. I was going 
into Manhattan to meet a friend of mine at the World 
Trade Center. We were going into midtown. I hopped on 
the 2 train some time around quarter to nine and within 
minutes after that, we went one stop to Chambers Street 
and they stopped the train and they asked everybody to 
get out of the train and we left at Chambers Street. 
We walked out and when I came out at Chambers Street, I 



G . BURBANO 

saw the one building on fire. Actually we saw mostly 
just smoke. 

Then within -- we are watching it and I 
started walking down towards the Center, and then 
within minutes after that, I heard a second explosion. 
At that point I literally ran down to the Center and 
when I got to -- I came down Chambers Street. I came 
down Church. 

Q. Church? 

A. Yes, I came down this way, I came down 
Barclay Street. I came across West, came by the two 
buildings down Vesey Street and went in front of the 
Trade Center. When I came down here there was a lot of 
debris all around this area. 

Q. That's all along Vesey Street? 

A. That's right, all along Vesey Street. There 
was a lot of debris. There was a lot of people that 
were injured. There were a lot of people running away 
from the buildings. I went past most of those people 
and I went to the front of the World Trade Center. 

Q. That would be on West Street? 

A. That's right. I was on West Street and at 
the front of the World Trade Center I saw numerous fire 
trucks and there was already a few ambulances there. I 



G . BURBANO 

found somewhere around Vesey Street and West Street I 
ran into Joe Cahill. I told Joe, I said, do you guys 
need help. I said you know I'm here. I was dressed in 
regular clothes. I didn't have anything on me. Joe 
Cahill gave me his sweat shirt that said Cahill on it, 
which to this day is plowed. 

He said, you know, he said I need you to grab 
some of these guys that are coming in and see if you 
can set up a triage unit somewhere nearby. He said 
there are units set up all over the place. We have 
tons of patients. So myself and about 4 or 5 EMTs, I 
don't know any of these guys -- 

Q. Were they Fire Department EMTs? 

A. They were no, they were our unit, EMS EMTs. 
There was numerous trucks parked all along this -- like 
from below the pedestrians street all the way up. This 
way they had parked the ambulances on the left side. 

Q. On West Street? 

A. That's right. And then he told me to take 
that ambulance with a few EMTs and if I can go around 
to the front of the building, to the front of the Trade 
Center, which would probably -- he led me to believe 
from the map that it would have been like by 5 World 
Trade Center, where there were patients all along 



G . BURBANO 

here . 

I grabbed a couple of them. I put them in 
the ambulance, on to vehicle 307, which was there. I 
took one of them -- the guy in front of me with me in 
the front was -- I believe it was a new EMT . He was 
only on the job a few months and as soon as we pulled 
away, we heard a large fall of something. It looked to 
me like it was just like a large chunk of the Center 
from this side fell on top of this area. 

At that point I was going to turn the vehicle 
around, but there was like a huge cloud of dirt and 
debris that was just coming to us, and I pulled away. 
I went up West Street with a few of the EMTs in there. 
As we went up West Street there was numerous EMS 
personnel. Of course we were all running up the street 
now. 

When we got like somewhere around Murray 
Street, I ran into a supervisor there who I used to 
work with, actually, a couple of years ago, Marty 
Miller and a couple of other supervisors. There was a 
Chief also there, but I don't remember his name. 

At that point I opened up the back of the 
truck. A lot of that cloud of dust had settled in and 
they had pulled out a police officer who was with a 



G . BURBANO 

Scott packing and everything. He couldn't breathe and 
we put him in the back of the ambulance right there on 
that corner. 

We met up with some St. Vincent's ambulances 
there also. One of the girl -- I know her by first 
name. I don't know her last name. Her name is 
Ernestine. She is a medic out of St. Vinny's. She 
used to work here on Staten Island with us as BLS out 
of St. Vincent Staten Island. Now she is a medic in 
Manhattan. I ran into her there and we took that cop 
and carried him over to the ambulance. We put him in 
the back of the ambulance. I started him on a 
treatment. The BLS crew was there. 

Then within sometime after that, there was 
more debris that was falling. There was like another 
cloud, so we moved up further. We went up further with 
the ambulance. That police officer -- we actually got 
into a little bit of a verbal thing, because he wanted 
to go back and we told him you should not go back. He 
couldn't breathe. We had to literally carry him up to 
begin with. He started running back and then soon 
after that, he -- I was -- the radio -- the ambulance 
was open and all we heard on the radio was that the 
building was collapsing. The building was collapsing. 



G . BURBANO 

Q. You didn't happen to get a name on the police 
officer, did you? 

A. I didn't get his name. He was one of the ESU 
guys. He was in his 40s. You know, we started him on 
a treatment and then he took off out of the ambulance 
and he started running down West Street and we actually 
followed him. I actually grabbed him. I tried to put 
him back in the truck and we couldn't do that. The guy 
couldn't breathe. Actually I saw that. That was -- 
they actually caught that on videotape. It was on the 
one of the news shows when I was there. We saw that on 
video . 

We started sort of making our way back 
because a lot of that dust settled. 

Q. Going back south? 

A. Going back south towards the Center. There 
was patients that were in that area that were covered 
in smoke and dust and all that other stuff that was on 
them. There was another ambulance that was left there 
and it was left wide open, so I hopped on that vehicle 
and moved that vehicle on forward. 

Q. Went north with that. 

A. That's right. Went north with that, and met 
with them somewhere around, I guess like Warren Street, 



G . BURBANO 

where there is that -- a parking lot outside. Then as 
soon as that happened, we saw the second building go 
down . 

At that point when the second building went 
down, we moved further, everybody hopped in the 
ambulances and we moved further -- there was a police 
chief who was actually running towards the Center and 
we actually almost tackled this guy, because he was 
running towards the building when that second building 
collapsed and we grabbed him and we put him in the 
ambulance with us and we ended up down by Canal Street, 
so we went all the way up north to Canal Street. 

After the two buildings were down, we -- I 
took those EMTs that were with me initially. I hopped 
in the back of the ambulance along with a whole bunch 
of others. We had about 12 people in the ambulance at 
that point, and cut across the east side, trying to get 
down Church. We couldn't get down Church, so we just 
kept -- crossed behind City Hall over to the east side 
because we were told to report to the ferry terminal at 
that point. 

We came down to the ferry terminal. At the 
ferry terminal I ran into some people that I knew from 
actually, you know, Staten Island, Mark Cohen and 



G . BURBANO 

Katherine Zarr, who was having trouble breathing and we 
started treating her at the ferry terminal. Her 
partner was initially missing, Mark Harris. We didn't 
know where he was because apparently they were like 
somewhere near the building when the first building 
started coming down. We started treating her and then 
for the rest of the day we just started treating people 
that were coming down to the ferry. That was it. 

But as far as the time line goes, I know that 
I got on the subway sometime like around 25 to 9, 
somewhere around that time, and it was just a few 
minutes . I mean I figured I waited for the subway for 
a few minutes, then I got on the 2 train and then went 
one stop and they kicked us out. 

By the time I ran down, it was when -- pretty 
much when I got -- I must have been a few blocks away, 
so I was probably like somewhere around Barclay Street 
when the second building got hit. I didn't see the 
building get hit. We just heard the building got hit. 
Then I came across this way and I came to -- towards 
the front of the World Trade Center. 

I mean I saw -- when I got in front there was 
tons of fire units, EMS personnel, a lot of voluntary 
personnel were there. There was a couple of 



10 
G . BURBANO 



Metropolitan ambulances that I noticed as I walked by. 
The EMS ambulances were parked basically from the front 
of the World Trade Center here all the way under the 
pedestrian bridge that way. 

Q. So from the north tower basically going north 
on West Street? 

A. Yes. They were all parked from the north 
tower right in front, because I ended up going behind 
what's 6 World Trade Center, which I never knew what 
number that was, but I ended up going behind the 6 
World Trade Center, came in front of the building here 
where the old hotel was and that's where they had set 
up a lot of those command centers right there. 

When that first wall collapsed, I just pulled 
away from there. I mean I just pulled away from there 
when that wall collapsed, and at that point, one of the 
EMTs who was with me in the front who was very upset, 
you know, he said, you know, should we go back, should 
we go back. I said we can't go back at this point. We 
didn't know what the damage was, but we knew that a lot 
of those people were probably injured or at least 
(inaudible), but that's basically it. 

After that we made our way to the ferry 
terminal. I don't remember what time after that to be 



11 



G . BURBANO 



honest with you. I lost complete track of time after 
that until 1:30, 2:00, I think it was, when I finally 
to my ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^| 
I, 



Q. Okay, George. Is there anything else you 
might want to add to this? 

A. No, that's basically it. 

MR. TAMBASCO: I thank you for your interview 
and the interview will be concluded at 1459 
hours . 



File No. 9110057 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

PARAMEDIC MARK HARRIS 

Interview Date: October 11, 2001 



Transcribed by Elisabeth F. Nason 



M. HARRIS 

MR. TAMBASCO: Today is October 11, 2001. 

The time is 1509 hours. I'm Mike Tambasco 

assigned to the World Trade Center Task Force. 

Conducting an interview with Paramedic Mark Harris 

of Battalion 22. We are in the conference room at 

Division 5. This interview is in reference to the 

events that were witnessed by Paramedic Harris on 

September 11, 2001. 

Q. Mark, if you could, tell me your story. 

A. We got sent, I don't remember the exact time 
when we got sent, but as we got into the tunnel, we 
were told -- we heard the fact that the -- there was a 
confirmed plane had gone into tower one and that there 
were people coming out of the windows and rubble and 
everything. As we got out of the tunnel -- 

Q. Who were you working with? 

A. Kathy Zarr. As we got out of the tunnel, we 
looked -- got out -- pulled out of the tunnel and the 
second plane hit as we pulled out of the tunnel. 

Q. You saw it hit? 

A. I didn't see it, but we heard the explosion. 
We heard the explosion and looked up. We then were 
directed to -- this is North -- South End street. We 
were directed on down Liberty Street to South End 



M. HARRIS 

Street and we parked right in Gateway Plaza right 
behind the World Financial Center at Au Bon Pain. Our 
vehicle was the second to last vehicle in the line of 
about 10, in the line of about 10, with the Hatzolah 
MERV in the corner. 

Q. In like the little alcove? 

A. In like the little alcove, right. Like a 
little alcove. There was a bank of phones right on the 
other side of Liberty Street that will come into play 
afterwards. We were advised by Chief Grant to set up a 
triage, a primary or secondary triage center, since we 
were told there was going to be one inside the Trade 
Center and then once that came out, the patients would 
be brought to us . 

We were told we would be moved up to 
approximately the West Side Highway. We set up our 
equipment, we set up -- actually, we used wrought iron 
tables at Au Bon Pain as like a makeshift stretch of 
beds . 

I then -- we were there about 10, 15 minutes, 
maybe a little more, talking. We then moved the 
ambulances about 10 feet further down to allow for more 
ambulances, since they initially parked parallel to the 
West Side Highway -- perpendicular to the West Side 



M. HARRIS 

Highway, we made them parallel, so we could go access 
out North End Streets down towards any of the 
hospitals . 

We then -- there was no patients as of yet in 
our sector. I, along with one or two other police 
officers, walked over to the West Side Highway and we 
were standing on the planter part of the West Side 
Highway -- you know there was like a planter. 
Q. Like a divide? 

A. The divide, right, or planter. We were 
watching people come down. We were watching people 
come down. I myself witnessed about 15 or 18 people 
hit the ground. I saw two firemen -- I'm going to use 
the word explode, but a body fell on them and they 
exploded along with the body. They were walking into 
the Trade Center. I don't know who they were, but I 
just know that one of them was cut in half and the 
other one exploded. 

We took a step back, because there were parts 
of the building was falling, which I saw a Port 
Authority policeman, a few civilians killed by falling 
debris and also another few firemen as they were going 
into the building. I don't remember the names or the 
exact numbers, but I just remember that there was at 



M. HARRIS 

least two to five people I saw actually get hit by 
bodies as they came down. 

I then proceeded to walk back to tell Chief 
Grant that I think that we should, you know, that that 
-- what was happening over here. Chief McCracken was 
with them, because we were about to set up a triage 
center right in front of the building. I wanted to 
relay to them because I didn't know what was going on, 
but I just saw that, so I walked back and as we walked 
back, we were sitting there talking and we heard a 
sound that sounded like a plane -- like you were in the 
middle of a plane engine. 

Everybody looked up and you said oh, no, a 
third one. That's how loud it was. Then we turned our 
eyes toward the Trade Center and we saw the top 
building come down. Unfortunately for me I was in the 
street at the time with no cover. The only coverage I 
had was the first ambulance. So I ran. I had my vest 
on, my bullet resistant vest. I ran. I dove under 
that ambulance and it started to get buried with 
rubble . 

I dug myself out from underneath the 
ambulance and I started running towards the back of Au 
Bon Pain, which at least was a building between us. As 



M. HARRIS 

my vest can prove, the straps across my back cut, my 
vest was cut into shreds in the back. It was three 
different places, there's rips about 4 or 5 inches from 
where glass went across my body in the back. 

We got hit with the glass, debris, and I got 
knocked over and I then made my way to the side of the 
building, which luckily was lined up with about 100 
bottles of water. I thought I was about to die, 
because I couldn't breathe. Debris was raining on top 
of me. I went under one of those wrought iron tables 
that we had lined, put a stretcher mat over, and I was 
using that as shelter. I couldn't see anybody or 
anything around me. I thought I was starting to 
suffocate because you couldn't breathe because of what 
was in my mouth, so I started washing my mouth out. 

I then -- I had contact lenses in. I figured 
that there was going to be a heat blast, so I ripped my 
contacts out. Unfortunately underneath the contacts 
was cement and I cut my corneas in half. 85 percent in 
half. It cut my corneas almost completely in half. 

The debris stopped shortly afterwards and I 
ran into Au Bon Pain and started pulling people out 
that were buried under glass. There was, I think, one 
or two people that were dead in there. I don't 



M. HARRIS 

remember exactly. The police officer that I walked up 
to that he was just telling me about his vacation that 
he was going on in two days, he was killed. 

The Hatzolah MERV was destroyed. The 
ambulance in front of the one in front of mine that I 
was on, the ambulance that I was under was damaged. 
The ambulance in front of that one was destroyed. I 
don't know whose it was. I think it may have been a 
Midwood ambulance was destroyed. The Hatzolah MERV was 
destroyed. 

I then ran to try and get people out from 
under the debris. There was a bunch of Hatzolah people 
that we pulled out. I started running towards the 
building, pulling people out as we went. I couldn't 
see. We had no equipment. We had no nothing. 

So the next thing we did is somebody 
remembered that there was down here, a couple of blocks 
down, was a little pier, not Liberty Park Pier, but a 
tiny little pier. There were buildings over here. Two 
blocks down. 

Q. Right. Down like around Rector Street and 
all? 

A. Right. There is a little tiny pier over here 
with a park. We started evacuating people down the 



M. HARRIS 

street from the buildings in Battery Park City and we 
set up an evacuation point on to tug boats. There was 
an EMS Captain, I'm not going to mention names, ran 
away and cowered and as people will tell you, I assumed 
command and I said I wanted everybody's EMS name, every 
EMS person that was there, I wanted to set up two 
sectors . 

We did that, we started -- we evacuated 
approximately 5,000 people and I even went on the 
Richmond frequency and -- probably still on there. I 
will get in trouble. I tried to tell the Citywide 
dispatcher. We kept on getting cut off, cut off, cut 
off. I went on the Richmond frequency and Moshe was 
the dispatcher. I told him, I said 22 Victor with a 
priority, 22 Victor, go ahead. I told him, we have an 
evacuation point set up here. We have injured 
personnel but we are evacuating to -- evacuating to 
wherever they evacuated it to. I had no idea where it 
was. Please advise that there is no officer here, that 
we just were evacuating people out of the buildings. 
I then realized that all our equipment was 
still at the World Financial Center. 

Q. Up by Au Bon Pain? 

A. Right. So I got into vehicle 145 and I drove 



M. HARRIS 

up the street to get the equipment. We got up there 
and I saw John Rothmund up there. He went to his 
vehicle one way. I put the equipment in my vehicle and 
approximately then there were about 10 firemen and 
policemen milling around. 

Q. This was all by right by Au Bon Pain over 
there? 

A. Right, right. Milling around. There were 
people buried at the phone that we pulled their bodies 
off the phone. That was right across the street. We 
pulled them out. We didn't pronounce them because it 
was -- then we heard that wall again, that creak 
again. We looked up and we saw that the radio tower 
started to waiver on the second building. 

A fireman broke the window to 145 and they 
piled into the back of that vehicle and this is like 
the Keystone cops. Five of them, six of them in the 
back. Two on the bumper, one on the windshield wipers, 
one holding on to the mirror. We're going back down 
South End Street towards the only safety we knew, which 
was the pier. 

As we are driving down here everybody in the 
vehicle, everybody is screaming, fucking drive, drive, 
drive, because behind us was the black cloud of the 



10 
M. HARRIS 



building collapsing. 

Q. The second building. 

A. Second building collapsing. We drove down 
and we had just gotten emptied out. Everybody emptied 
out when it hit and it knocked all of us down. I mean 
we were covered. I couldn't see at this time. I 
couldn't see at all. I had basically vision of 
shapes. I found my partner. She evacuated on a boat 
to somewhere. I then went and I drove in vehicle 145 
driving around, pulling people out of from under 
things, I drove along. 

Q. Were you going up this -- 

A. No, Albany. No, it was on this side. 

Q. Right. 

A. I went up Albany. There is a little parking 
garage right over here. Right over here is a parking 
garage with a taxi in it. I remember the cab. There 
is a taxi in it, or maybe one of these. We are driving 
up and we're pulling people out from under the highway, 
we're pulling firemen out, and they in turn were 
pulling other people out. 

There was one car that was sort of blocking 
the door to somebody, so a bunch of us pushed the car 
out of the way. Then on one of these streets I saw an 



11 

M. HARRIS 



ESU Sergeant, John Engel from ESU in Brooklyn. He 
pulled me under a hydrant and washed me off because I 
was covered. I was out of it and covered and I had no 
idea where anybody else was . Everybody else had 
evacuated. 

So I'm driving along the West Side Highway 
pulling people out, and then we made the turn. I got 
only as far as approximate -- about Albany Street and I 
walked up towards -- 

Q. Towards the Trade Center buildings? 
A. Towards the Trade Center building and there 
were people in our -- I don't know if it was ambulances 
or if it was -- I think they were ambulances and we 
pulled them out. We broke a couple of windows on the 
ambulances. We pulled people out. We pulled people 
out from -- there was two unmarked people in a sedan 
that we pulled out. There was a lady in a wheelchair 
that I pulled out. I don't remember. Then I know 
there was a couple of other people with me but I wasn't 
sure who -- I know one was a fireman and one was a cop, 
but I don't know who exactly they were. 

I then -- I was there, I would say -- I got 
to tell you it seemed like eternity, but I know it was 
only about an hour, pulling people out. I got as close 



12 
M. HARRIS 



to the building as I could to pull people out. We were 
then looking for Chief Grant, his aides was panicking. 
We sort of took her under our wing. Chief Grant we 
couldn't find. Chief McCracken we couldn't find. We 
couldn't find anybody. I had no idea where any 
officers were. 

I got as close to the building as I could. 
There was just body parts and bodies all over the 
place. There was just -- at least 50 to 100 bodies 
that I saw. I mean not full bodies, I should say, but 
pieces of bodies. I then drove down the West Side 
Highway towards -- 

Q. Towards the ferry? 

A. The ferry, and as I made the turn I saw a 
vehicle with a Battalion Chief and two people in 
there. I grabbed Ian Swords and George Orlando, 
because they were my partners, and we just started 
walking up to see if we could help people. There was 
nobody that could be helped at the time because 
everybody was buried. Everything was on fire and you 
just couldn't get close enough. 

We then went down to the staging area. I 
mean they told me what I looked like the next day and 
they said that they got scared because I was walking 



13 
M. HARRIS 



along dazed, I couldn't find anybody. I couldn't find 
anybody. I had no idea where anybody was. It was like 
a ghost town. You are walking and there is this fog 
there. You are walking under this fog and you are 
seeing people and you are going are you okay, and they 
say yes and you just walking on to the next one. You 
are going, are you okay, yes, and I remember two people 
I asked are you okay. They weren't okay because they 
were dead. 

I just remember going to the pier and staying 
there. They tried to send me home three times. I left 
at 1:30 in the morning. By that time I couldn't see. 
I had to have -- I was driven home by -- what's his 
name. I was seen at St. Vincents, where they gave me 
some medicine in the eyes and they said -- they 
diagnosed the next day at the ophthalmologist. They 
were 85 percent cut. Sliced through and 85 to 90 
percent scratched. 

Marc Cohen was there also. He was inside the 
ferry terminal. All I remember is not being able to 
see and he was going through a whole bottle of 
Tylenol. Probably wasn't a good idea but I went home 
at 1:30 in the morning. I got taken back to the 
hospital at 12:30, 1 o'clock in the morning, after not 



14 
M. HARRIS 



-- finally I couldn't stand the pain any more. 

That's basically as far as I can remember. 

Q. Did I understand you to say something that 
you actually saw Chief Ganci at some point? 

A. Yes. In between the first and second 
collapse when I went back to get the equipment, we 
walked around and again, I can -- do you want to know 
the exact time. 

Q. No. 

A. I'm sorry, sir. I remember specifically 
seeing the Fire Department command center -- or command 
post. I remember -- again I don't want to swear to it, 
but from every recollection I have I remember Chief 
Ganci being there and him being knocked down and was 
(inaudible) . As far as I remember. It could have been 
another fireman but I remember somebody saying my god, 
that was Ganci. I don't want to swear by it, but I 
know I was there. 

Q. I guess on the west side over here somewhere? 

A. As far as I can recall, I saw John Peruggia 
was talking to him and then Peruggia walked away and a 
couple of minutes after Peruggia walked away, I had 
come down. I don't remember exactly where it was, but 
again I don't want to swear by it, but I'm just going 



15 
M. HARRIS 



by what I saw and what somebody said to me. It was at 
a Fire Department, what was left of the Fire Department 
command post and it was a white helmet and I was told 
by one of the firemen, my god, that was Ganci . 

Along with him, I was told that the Chaplain 
was also killed a few minutes before that. I didn't 
see him being carried or anything like that, but that 
(inaudible) . 

Q. It was debris that basically hit him? 

A. I don't know. The Chaplain or Ganci? 

Q. Ganci. 

A. I don't know. I know something hit him. One 
of the people that I was with said a body hit him. One 
of the people said -- all I know is that when something 
hit him. I don't want to swear it was a body. I don't 
want to swear it was debris, but something hit him. So 

Q. How is your vision now? 



16 



M. HARRIS 



Q. Mark, is there anything else that you would 
like to add to that. Any feelings, anything that you 
want? 

A. Nice guy, I would imagine not. You know that 
feeling when you are falling and you wake up right 
before you fall, when you are sleeping. 

Q. Yes. 

A. I get that every night. 



Il mean I don't even know where to get my 



17 
M. HARRIS 



(inaudible) vest repaired. My vest from the glass 
going across my back, the back of the vest is all cut 
in four or five places. And the cover. I had -- I 
cleaned out my trunk yesterday. This belt still has 
white stuff from the Trade Center. But that's about 
it. 

MR. TAMBASCO: Mark, listen, I thank you for 
the information and for the story. We will 
conclude the interview at 1531 hours. Once again, 
thank you. 



File No. 911005? 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
PARAMEDIC MARC COHEN 
Interview Date: October 11, 2001 



Transcribed by Nancy Francis 



M. COHEN 

MR. RADENBERG: Today's date is October 11th, 
2001. The time is 1505 hours and this is Paul 
Radenberg of the Fire Department, City of New York. I 
am conducting an interview with -- 

MR. COHEN: Paramedic Marc Cohen, Shield 
2093, Battalion 22, EMS command. 

MR. RADENBERG: — of the Fire Department of 
the City of New York. We are currently at Seaview 
Hospital, Battalion 22. This interview is regarding 
the events of September 11th, 2001. 

Q. If you'd start with where you were at the 
time of the first impact, the first plane. 

A. My partner and I, Kenny Davis, who is also a 
paramedic here at EMS Battalion 22, we were in the 
city, probably about 7:00 o'clock. That was the 
primary election day and we were planning to work for 
Mark Green, his campaign. We were on the 59th Street 
bridge when out of the corner of our eye we saw the 
first plane hit the World Trade Center. Looking south 
from the 59th Street bridge, we noticed the smoke. 

We immediately went to Mark Green's 
headquarters, which was on 42nd Street. We made a 
telephone call to find out what we should do. We were 
directed at that point to go to Metropolitan Hospital 



M. COHEN 

and secure a vehicle, which we did. We got there. We 
saw Lieutenant Craig Wing at the desk. He handed us 
keys to a vehicle, and with about five additional 
off-duty EMS members, I don't know their names, they 
were working also at the local union that day, we got 
on the FDR southbound. I was driving. My partner 
Kenny was in the front with me and we had about four or 
five other EMTs, paramedics, in the back. Like I said, 
I don't know all of their names. 

The FDR was basically shut down already. 
There were no cars on it, so we made pretty good time. 
When we came over the limited sight area like right 
about by the Brooklyn Bridge, from what we were talking 
about after, we believe that both buildings were still 
standing, but as we passed, Tower 1 had collapsed at 
that point, basically while we were on the FDR, like 
directly in front of the building. So that kind of 
gives us a sense of time. Everything was kind of 
moving pretty fast. 

We were directed by Manhattan South dispatch 
to go to the South Ferry terminal. We got to the South 
Ferry terminal prior to Building 2 collapsing. I know 
that because I looked up and I saw one of the Trade 
Center buildings was gone, but the other one was still 



M. COHEN 

standing. Supplies were starting to arrive. They were 
starting to organize what was going on, and I was told 
by a Lieutenant in uniform with a Suburban, I don't 
recall who it was or even what he looks like or what 
his command was, but they were starting to set up and 
that we were going to expect a lot of patients because 
the building had just collapsed, one building had just 
collapsed. 

So while they were throwing stuff out, I 
decided that I needed to start maybe heading and 
setting up a forward triage area because we weren't 
seeing patients. We were all kind of wondering why 
there was nobody that we were treating. So, by 
myself. I ran to the corner of Battery Park City, 
which is kind of like where the parking area is where 
you would pull in to the ferry terminal if you had a 
car, and then I made my way around walking down 
towards, I guess a little bit south of where the 
Brooklyn Battery Tunnel is. I was figuring that there 
would be just patients all laid out all over the place 
and everybody was running. There really weren't any 
patients and stuff. 

Then, while I was looking around, then the 
second World Trade Center collapsed basically while I 



M. COHEN 

was looking at it. But the wind was at my back because 
I was facing north, so everything was kind of just 
blowing the other way. I mean, stuff was all over the 
place, but it wasn't as bad as I thought it would be. 
Then, of course, I started cursing and screaming and 
then I just ran back to the ferry terminal because I 
thought that patients were coming around kind of like 
flanking us, because the way the building collapsed, I 
mean, there was no way anybody could get through. 
There was like a huge pile of debris now on the West 
Side Highway. 

I got there and then more EMS resources 
started to arrive, people that were closer to the 
buildings, like Dr. Cherson, Chief McCracken, Captain 
Frank D'Amato, Lieutenant Medjuck. We started to just 
organize incoming units that were there and started 
pulling stuff off the ambulances, back boards and 
fluids and IVs . Basically, a sense of time line at 
that point would be -- I guess it would have to be 
probably 11:00 o'clock by now. I mean, it was just one 
long -- we saw a couple of patients there, you know, 
critical, some with a pelvic fracture or long bone 
fractures and stuff, but I guess at this point -- I 
mean, I know at this point both of the Trade Center 



M. COHEN 

towers were down, so I guess it's about -- it would 
have to be probably about 11:00 o'clock now, 11:00 
o ' clock or 11:30. 

I stayed there. I was there until 5:00 
o'clock the next morning. I stayed there the whole 
time . 

Q. Did you recognize, when you were at South 
Ferry, when you first got there, aside from the 
lieutenant, recognize anybody else that was staging 
down in that area at that point? 

A. No. There were just so many people piling 
through the terminal, walking on the FDR Drive, 
coming -- I guess somehow they got onto the FDR Drive 
by the Brooklyn Bridge, the ramps, and then they came 
southbound on the FDR Drive. It was just hundreds, 
thousands. I mean, I couldn't even place a number on 
it. But the police started to tell them to head north, 
just to go, if you could walk, start walking, go north, 
however you can get out of here, just start walking 
north, and there were people starting to walk over the 
Brooklyn Bridge and I think a ferry took people out. 
Oh, yes. There were people getting on private boats 
also. I don't even know where these boats -- like 
fishing boats or private vessels and stuff from over 



M. COHEN 

there. I don't know how they were doing it, but I saw 
a lot of private boats with just a lot of people on 
it. But as far as EMS personnel, the only people that 
I recognized when I got there -- well, I didn't 
recognize him. I mean, I recognized him as an EMS 
lieutenant in uniform. I don't know... 

No, I don't know his name. But he was the 
only person I recognized until I came back after the 
second building collapsed, after the second Trade 
Center collapsed, people that were coming that were 
close from the collapses, that I guess were closer 
because they were covered in debris, and even though I 
was relatively close, I guess, the wind being at my 
back, I didn't get like covered with stuff, but the 
first people that I recognized seeing and talking to 
other than the people I came with in the ambulance from 
Metropolitan Hospital were Chief McCracken, Dr. Cherson 
from OMA, Captain Frank D'Amato and Lieutenant Bruce 
Medjuck and. . . 

Let me just think about it, who else was 
there. Nobody else, other than the people I came with, 
my partner, Kenny Davis. 

Q. Do you remember what the vehicle number was 
that you got, that you picked up at Metropolitan? 



M. COHEN 

A. It was a three-digit number starting with 2. 
I don't want to say 227 because I think 227 is a 
vehicle here and that's why it's popping into my mind. 
But it was an older -- 

Q. It's a 2300. 

A. Yes. It was a three-digit number beginning 
with 2 and I'm sure -- I'm almost positive Lieutenant 
Wing made a notation in his lieutenant's log which 
vehicle we took because we know each other on a 
personal basis. Not personal. He knows my name and I 
know his name and stuff. So I'm sure he made a 
notation in his lieutenant logbook of which vehicle he 
gave us . 

Q. Any other thoughts that you would like to add 
or oddities that stand out, a little strange event or 
sight? Not that the whole thing wasn't. 

A. No. 

MR. RADENBERG: Okay. The time is now 1516 
hours. The interview is concluded. 



File No. 9110059 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

EMT VALERIE LONGO 

Interview Date: October 11, 2001 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



V. LONGO 2 

MR. TAMBASCO: This is Mike Tambasco 
with the Trade Center task force conducting 
an interview with EMT Valerie Longo . We are 
in the conference room at Division 5 in 
Staten Island. The start time for the 
interview is 1430 hours. 

Q. Ms. Longo, please go right ahead and 
just tell us your story. 

A. After the first plane hit the World 
Trade Center we were assigned from Staten Island 
to go to -- actually to go to the VZ Bridge and 
wait. So that's what we did. It was about ten 
to 9 . I'm not sure exactly of the time. 
Q. Who were you working with? 
A. I was working with Steve Hess. 

We started heading towards the bridge, 
and we were told to just keep going. If I'm not 
mistaken, they said go over the bridge and start 
heading towards the city. 

We started heading towards the city. 
We were on the Gowanus . We were heading to the 
Battery Tunnel, and I think the second plane had 
already hit World Trade Center number two. 
Q. The south tower? 



V. LONGO 3 

A. The south tower. 

As we came out of the Battery Tunnel we 
drove along West Street. Do you want to know 
gory details . 

Q. I want to know as much as you can tell 
me . 

A. We had to avoid hitting body parts and 
plane parts, because that second plane that hit 
or the first plane that hit left all kinds of 
debris. So we were driving along West Street, 
and they were flagging us. They told us just to 
go to West and Vesey. 

So we finally made it up to West and 
Vesey, and we were told to park in front because 
we were 23 Henry. We parked right on Vesey and 
West. We were about the third ambulance up. 

At that time they said for us not to do 
anything. There were people who were already 
injured. They were in a little triage center in 
the back of the American Express building, which 
is -- 

Q. The west side towards the river? 

A. Towards the west side towards the 
river, there was a little triage center there, 



V. LONGO 4 

and they were treating a couple people. There 
were some doctors and nurses and EMTs . 

Around, I don't know, maybe 15 minutes 
or 20 minutes after we got there, 15 minutes, we 
heard a rumbling. It sounded like a freight 
train coming at you. All they did was say to 
run. So we ran down Vesey Street and ended up on 
North End, which is about a long block up. The 
first tower, whatever tower that was, number -- 
Q. The north tower? 

A. The north tower had fallen, and we 
didn't know what was going on. 

They gathered us all up after we caught 
our breath, whatever we did, and they said go get 
your buses. So we had to come back down. My 
partner came back down, got the bus, and the 
other guys got the buses, and met up on North End 
and Vesey. 

They said to set up a triage in a 
building in that area; then they said not to. So 
we took our equipment back. By the time we 
started getting our equipment back, the north 
tower started to rumble and the north tower 
started falling. They said get your buses and 



V. LONGO 5 

get the hell out of here. 

So that's what we did. We got in the 
buses, and we flew up to Murray and came around 
to River Terrace, which is a dead end. We were 
stuck in front of River Terrace close to Vesey at 
the end, by the water. We were at Vesey by the 
water . 

We were helping out people that were 
running down that way, and we waited. We didn't 
know what to do. We were by ourselves with our 
ambulance with only one other personnel; I think 
it was -- who was it? 

Q. EMS person? 

A. Yeah. He was with the LSU. 

Q. I believe Hanson, maybe, Eric Hanson? 

A. Yeah, Eric Hanson followed us. So it 
was us and Eric Hanson. We were handing out 
masks and water, and we just got ravaged. 
Everybody took everything. We were just helping 
people . 

We stayed there for, I don't know. I 
can't give you time frame because we were in 
quite a bit of shock because we actually -- yeah, 
we were in quite a bit of shock. 



V. LONGO 6 

A lieutenant found us. I'm sorry, he 
was a captain, Abdo . 

Q. Nahmod. 

A. Captain Nahmod came, and he said, "I 
want you to get your stuff and get up towards 
23rd and the piers. He said, no matter what you 
do, just go uptown. 

So Eric followed in the LSU, and we got 
in the bus and made our way uptown. We were 
still in very much shock. When we got up there, 
we stayed up there. 

Q. Set up an area of staging up there? 

A. No, no. What they do is they had us 
sit in the bus with 500 other buses, after they 
ravaged our ambulance, and just wait. We waited 
for hours. About 3:00 in the afternoon after we 
heard all the rescues going on, they actually 
released us. They told us there were 400 jobs 
holding in Manhattan. 

Meanwhile we had debris in the 
ambulance. We had no equipment, and they were 
going to give us a job in Manhattan. 



V. LONGO 



|l said, "We have no equipment in there." 
Everybody took everything. It's full of debris. 
It was ravaged. 

So we ended up making our way home. We 
found our way home. We finally made it back to 
the station, and that's where we stayed. That 
was the end of our day. We got the crap scared 
out of us, and we left. As I might about a lot 
of other people. 

It was frightening. It was absolutely 
the most frightening thing that I've ever 
experienced in my whole life. Me and my partner, 
I think we were white, we were so scared. I 
couldn't run. He had to practically grab me by 
my belt and carry me, because either I was too 
scared -- I have a bad ankle. That was it. 

So that was the end of our harrowing 
experience. We didn't get hurt. We didn't get 
injured. We tried to help people, but they sent 
us uptown. That was the end of our day. 



V. LONGO 8 

Q. Okay. 

A. That's my story. 

Q. Anything else you can think of you 
would like to add to it? 

A. Yeah. The next time something like 
this happens, tell people not to stand in front 
of the goddamn building. Okay? First of all, 
they were getting killed by debris. A plane hits 
a building, and where do you stand? Where do you 
park your vehicles? Underneath it? I don't 
think so. That was wrong from the get-go. 
Do I have the right to say that? 

Q. You can say whatever you want. 

A. Well, wrong, wrong, wrong. I'm 
serious. I'm serious. If they had thought to 
even try to park half a block away or a block 
away or somewhere where you can walk to get 
access or something. A lot of these people 
probably wouldn't have gotten killed if they -- 
they were hit by flying debris. You don't park 
under something that's burning. 

Q. This is the kind of stuff you were 
seeing? 

A. Oh, yeah, yeah. You look up, and it's 



V. LONGO 9 

two towers of flames. Now, we had a hard time 
seeing people jumping out because we were on that 
one side. We didn't see this building here. 

Q. The south building. Right. 

A. We saw the top of it but not the bottom 
half. We saw this one, because we were right 
here . 

Q. Right. 

A. So we saw the top half. 

Q. You saw the top of the north tower. 

A. Yeah. We actually saw it from an angle 
as we were looking up. Then the rumbling just 
took us for a loop, and then we ran. That's when 
everybody got covered with soot and debris and 
dust and everything else, not able to breathe. 

But I credit the lieutenant or the 
captain that was there -- god knows I can't 
remember his name; I have no idea who he was -- 
when he told us to run that way, towards the 
water. I credit him, because that was the way to 
go. I don't know who he was, and they just said 
run that way. Instead of running east or west, 
we ran south, if I'm not mistaken. 

Q. I guess actually west instead of south 



V. LONGO 10 

or north. 

A. Yes. Wherever the water was, that's 
where he made us run to. Instead of running this 
way or this way, which was -- 

Q. That's north. Instead of running north 
or south, they sent you west towards the water? 

A. They sent us towards the water, which 
was a godsend. Whoever it is, I credit them. I 
have no idea. I have no idea. But I'm glad they 
did. 

That's it. 

Q. Okay. Well, I thank you for your 
story. 

A. Quick and to the point. 

Q. That's it. 

MR. TAMBASCO: The interview will 

conclude at 1439 hours. 



File No. 9110060 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMT STEPHEN HESS 
Interview Date: October 11, 2001 



Transcribed by Elisabeth F. Nason 



S. HESS 

MR. RADENBERG: Today's date is October 11, 

2001. The time is 1433 hours. This is Paul 

Radenberg of the Fire Department of the City of 

New York. 

Q. I'm conducting an interview with? 

A. Stephen Hess. Shield 5612 EMT, assigned to 
23 Henry. 

Q. We are currently at Seaview Hospital, 
Battalion 52, EMS. This interview is regarding the 
events of September 11, 2001. Start with when you were 
assigned. 

A. All right. We first heard the first call 
after the first incident occurred, and our initial 
response was to that it was a small plane, a Cessna, 
lost power and hit the tower. Then they said it was a 
commercial airline. That happened at 848. We were 
assigned to the job at approximately 8:50. We were 
told initially to go to the Verrazano Bridge and stage 
there. Then it was to 92 Street in Brooklyn. Then to 
the Brooklyn Battery Tunnel and in the process they 
just kept saying, finally just said go to -- through 
the tunnel to Vesey and West Street. 

We got there I would say approximately 20 
minutes after we got the job. We came after the second 



S. HESS 

tower was hit, because we came over the Gowanus and we 
could see them both burning just before the Brooklyn 
Battery Tunnel. I know we were following lots of PD, 
fire apparatus, came through the tunnel, and our 
initial response was seeing body parts and airplane 
parts all over the west side. Just traumatic to see. 

We got to approximately West and Vesey, where 
Lieutenant Brad Mann took our unit designation and 
since we were HAZTAC, he staged us pretty close to the 
corner of West and Vesey. I think there was maybe two 
or three ambulances closer to West than us. We were 
helping the triage, we were instructed we wouldn't be 
transporting because of us being HAZTAC. They wanted 
us to remain there. 

We were helping out and then approximately, 
according to the time sheet, 9:55 we heard this loud 
rumbling noise, looked up and saw the building coming 
down. Everyone started yelling, run, run, run, so we 
started running up Vesey towards the Hudson River. I 
knew I was running fast and the thing that caused me 
some problems was turning around and seeing my partner 
saying please don't leave me. 

So basically, I grabbed her by the belt and 
picked her up is what she tells me. I don't remember. 



S. HESS 

But we basically ran down the street. Got to North End 
Avenue, ducked around the corner and saw the cloud of 
dust coming around. You know, saying this can't be 
really happening. 

Just after the first tower came down, we were 
standing there and I don't recall his name but some 
Captain from EMS said we need to get the ambulances. 
So I turned to my partner who was standing there and 
told her you stay right here. Don't move, because I 
ran back to get our bus and was able to get on it, I 
was covered in some debris and dust, but I knew we 
needed our -- the equipment we have, the decon and 
stuff like that. 

We were treating some patients who came 
around the corner. Irrigating their eyes, trying to 
get the dust off as best as we could, when all of a 
sudden we heard later on the noise of the second tower 
going. We jumped in the bus and started driving away. 
We wound up near the Hudson River, near the park over 
here. We kind of got trapped in a loop because there 
was so much debris and vehicles that we couldn't get 
out of there. Our thoughts are like where do we go 
from here. We were like, we are going in the water if 
we have to. They started bringing the boats and then 



S. HESS 

the debris cleared up and we were able to get out and 
they restaged us at Chelsea Piers. 

I'm guessing that was somewhere around 11 
o'clock. To be honest I'm not exactly sure when. Yes, 
because we were stuck down, it was 10:29, the north 
tower went down and we were stuck in that street for a 
good half an hour, 45 minutes, it might have been even 
later . 

We came out of -- down Murray Street, I 
remember that, and we looked back and just saw this 
blank hole in the sky with what used to be the World 
Trade Center with smoke billowing up and people covered 
in dust and debris. Like I said, the next thing we 
restaged up there and we were treating some patients up 
there, but we didn't do any transports. 

After that, I think it was around 3:00 we 
were released from the scene. We came back to 
Battalion 22 in Staten Island. As far as seeing 
people, like I said, I knew Lieutenant Mann, because he 
was in my old station. The Captain I really never 
caught his name because he was telling us what to do. 
I saw some medics that I knew, like Darnowski, a couple 
of other people that I knew. Ray Viscutti, he used to 
work for EMS, but now he works for a volunteer. 



S. HESS 



People running for their lives. Running just 
trying to get away. I saw another guy from our 
station, Eric Hansen. We wound up on River Terrace 
with him. Caught in that loop. Beyond that, that's 
about what I remember. 

The thing that stuck with me was turning 
around and seeing my partner. 
Q. Right. 

fout I was not going to leave her by herself. 
She told me I came back, that I picked her up and 
basically ran with her like a football to get out of 
there, you know. Something I will never forget. 
Something that really bothered me -- getting all the 
beeps on your pager from your parents, your wife. You 
can't even call them. 

I still think about it. Sometimes it's 
difficult to deal with but it's getting better. 

Q. When you were over here on the first -- 

A. West and Vesey. 

Q. West and Vesey. When you were over there, 
the patients that you were treating were all at that 
point were all coming up on their own? 

A. We walked into a staging area on West and 



S. HESS 

Vesey and there was about 30 people already there. 

Q. Patients? 

A. Yes. We were kind of kept to the side 
because of being HAZTAC, they wanted us available near 
our unit. 

Q. Right, right. 

A. Then it became so overwhelming that we moved 
over a little to help people, do what we could. We got 
some burn victims that you could see and people with 
respiratory problems. That's about the point when the 
building came down and my back was to it. I heard the 
noise. I turned around and it looked like I was 
looking at a movie. It was like surrealistic. 

I can still vividly see the debris coming 
down and starting running. The noise is -- I thought 
it was another plane actually, because the noise was so 
deafening loud, from everything coming down. That's 
what we covered and encountered that day. 

Q. You said Darnowski and Canton were there? 

A. No, Viscutti. He was in my academy class but 
he left and he works for Lenox Hill I believe. 

Q. Okay. 

A. But I remember Darnowski because they are 
twins. There is Jimmy and Kevin and I saw both of 



S. HESS 

them, but I don't remember which is which at this 
point . 

Q. Okay. 

A. The one that I saw initially was saying that 
he just dropped his girl off and she was up in the 
towers. Then I remember like I said, helping with 
triage and then the building coming down, and just 
running as fast as I could because we didn't know if 
they were toppling over or coming straight down. I 
figured if they are toppling over, it's all over. 

Q. Do you remember once you came out of the 
Battery Tunnel, which way you came up to? 

A. We came out of the Battery Tunnel. We came 
out on to the west side and came up straight up the 
West Side Highway, coming between the World Trade 
Center and the financial district. Like I said we 
turned the corner on Vesey and Lieutenant Mann told us 

-- ask us our designation and we told him 23 Henry. 
He says full HAZTAC? We said yes. He staged us right 
on the corner of West and Vesey. 

Like I said, maybe two and three ambulances 
up from the corner to be available. He said try to 
assist with some triage and patient care, but don't 
transport because we need you. 



S. HESS 

Q. Do you remember any other, aside from 
Lieutenant Mann and the Captain, any other EMS officers 
that you remember being there? 

A. Just later on. Not at that point, I saw 
Lieutenant Mann and the Captain -- for the life of me I 
can't remember his name, you know. But I remember what 
he looks like. I remember that. I will never forget. 

Q. Did you ever run into him before? 

A. Never seen him before. I don't know him, 
wouldn't know wouldn't have known him from Adam that 
day, except for the fact that he had his shirt on, with 
two bars . He was -- him and Lieutenant Mann were the 
ones setting up staging, positioning the busses. 
Turned out not to be the best spot afterwards, but who 
knew these buildings were going to come down. No one 
expected that. 

Q. Right, right. Darnowski, that's who you saw 
there initially, he was off duty? 

A. Yes, I'm assuming he was. He was in 
uniform. He might have been going to work or coming 
home. But he said he dropped his girl off at work. 

Q. He wasn't part of a crew that you know of? 

A. No, not that I can recall. 

Q. Okay. 



10 
S. HESS 



A. You know, I just, like I said the only reason 
I remember him is because we knew each other. I saw a 
lot of people that I had never seen before in my life, 
might not ever seen again. Hopefully they all got out 
of there, you know. That's about the best as I can 
remember what was going on. 

Q. Do you remember any vehicle numbers that were 
parked; EMS vehicle numbers that were parked around you 
at that point or -- 

A. You know what. 

Q. Did you recognize people from other stations 
maybe? 

A. No. Like I said, we are from Staten Island. 
They don't get too much contact with people in 
Manhattan. Initially most of the units were Manhattan 
units. I mean a few of the faces I kind of recollect 
seeing at the Academy at some point in time, but as to 
the names, vehicle numbers, I wasn't even looking. 

Q. Okay. No problem. Different people remember 
different things. 

a| 



11 

S. HESS 



Q. Anything else you want to add? 

A. No, nothing. 

Q. Thoughts or opinions? 

A. I would just like to know how a plane can 
disappear from the radar for 40 minutes, and no one 
does anything. I don't think it would have prevented 
anything, but it might have prevented -- I mean, what 
time did the Pentagon get hit? I think that was 
later. Someone might have been alerted to something 
that was going on but, you know, too little too late I 
guess . 

MR. RADENBERG: Okay. The time is now 1447. 

Interview is concluded. 



File No. 9110061 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

ABDO NAHMOD 

Interview Date: October 11, 2001 



Transcribed by Maureen McCormick 



MR. TAMBASCO: It is October 11. The time is 
12:31. I'm Mike Tambasco, assigned to the World 
Trade Center Task Force, conducting an interview 
into the events of September 11, at the World 
Trade Center. Today I'll be interviewing -- 
CAPTAIN NAHMOD: Captain ABDO NAHMOD . 
BY MR. TAMBASCO: 

Q. Where were you assigned that day, Captain? 
A. Operations . 

Q. If you'd be good enough to just try to tell 
us what you saw, what you did. Go right ahead. 

A. On that given morning, I was assigned to the 
office of operations, and I was spending some time with 
Lieutenant Mann, who was taking over the medical data 
base for operations, and we were on the 7th Floor when 
somebody up there said that the World Trade Center was 
just hit by a plane. 

At this point, we went to the window. We 
looked and, sure enough, we saw visible flames coming 
from the top of the World Trade Center. 

Many people began to respond in different 
vehicles, and at one point, I responded with EMT 
Richard Zarrillo, the special events coordinator, with 
Mr. Drury from BITS in his vehicle to get down to the 



ABDO NAHMOD 

World Trade Center. 

At this point, I communicated with Chief 
Peruggia via the land line, and we were directed to 
report to 7 World Trade to set up OEM. Both myself and 
EMT Zarrillo went to the 23rd Floor of 7 World Trade 
and began to log onto the terminals, as well as inform 
the citywide dispatch supervisor that we were 
activating OEM at this time, and operations were to 
begin . 

Moments thereafter, we were advised by the 
staff at OEM that we were to vacate the building, that 
they believed there was another possible plane on its 
way, and proceeded down the stairwell of 7 World Trade 
all the way down to the ground floor. 

Upon getting outside to 7 World Trade, I saw 
Chief Peruggia and Captain Stone, and I believe one of 
the EMTs from the Division 1 command outside. 

At this point, we were trying to establish a 
command center, as well as treatment and transport 
sector. I believe Chief Peruggia was trying to 
establish communication, and I was directed to move 
down to the garage area of the 7 World Trade where 
there were four bays, one having a truck in it and 
three that were open, and at that point, I believe 



ABDO NAHMOD 

there were some EMTs and one medic unit in front of 7 
World Trade building. 

At this point, we tried to gather all our 
equipment, gather some equipment from 7 World Trade, 
set up a treatment area at the bottom, and we were met 
by one of the doctors from OMA. I don't recall his 
name at this point. 

Q. Did you happen to recognize any of the guys 
that were in the ambulances, either the medics or the 
EMTs? 

A. No, I never worked Manhattan, and I really 
don't know. I know a few were from St. Clare's, and 
one was from New York Hospital, and a few were 
municipal units, but I didn't recognize any of the 
folks there. 

I'd say within 20 minutes to a half an hour 
of being down there or trying to set everything up, all 
of a sudden a loud noise, rubble, and sand, and dust -- 
everything just started toppling down. 

We did have one patient there that walked in 
for an eye injury, an older gentleman. He was sitting 
by the loading dock, and I was right next to him. 
Also, when this started happening, everybody started 
going to the main lobby. 



ABDO NAHMOD 

At this point, I tried to cover this 
gentleman up with myself and then remained in the 
loading dock curled up in the corner. 

Time passed. Couldn't tell you if it was 
five minutes or 50 minutes, but everything seemed dark, 
everything seemed black, and there were lots of sand, 
and rubble, and grit, and dirt and debris on top of 
myself and this gentleman. 

When everything cleared, I believe I saw 
Commissioner Tierney walking out of 7 after that, and 
everybody that we saw was accounted for that was there 
initially, as far as the providers. We tried to assist 
this gentleman onto a stretcher of the St. Clare's 
unit. We put him on the stretcher and started wheeling 
him northbound. I believe we were originally on Vesey, 
probably turned up West, and we went with this 
gentleman up West. 

Q. North on West? 

A. North on West, and I believe their ambulance 
was a block or two blocks away. I assume they put him 
in the ambulance and went on from there. 

Shortly after that, I was proceeding north on 
West Street, and then I heard another loud noise and 
looked behind, and, sure enough, it looked like the 



ABDO NAHMOD 

building was coming down. By then I managed to get to 
Stuyvesant High School and huddled in the doorway with 
a number of ESU cops and firefighters, and once again, 
the dust, and the debris and everything else came down, 
and shortly thereafter we started to look around for 
anybody that was hurt. 

We started going back towards the collapse 
site. We did manage to see a FDNY EMS command car with 
the windows broken, but the radio still working and 
running, I believe on West and Chambers. There I 
believe I saw, once again, Chief Peruggia and Chief 
Butler, and a number of other people starting to 
gather . 

We started to try to establish some kind of 
communication, but the radios weren't functioning all 
that well. We stayed at that point until we managed to 
set up a treatment sector, and so on and so forth, but 
in the interim, I remember seeing Chief Carasquillo up 
by River Street and Chambers . I did wander that way 
and then made it back towards West and Chambers. I 
think West and Chambers might have happened after I saw 
Chief Carasquillo. 

I did see Eric Hanson with the LSU by the 
river and Chambers, as well a number of other units 



ABDO NAHMOD 

there . 

From there, resources started to come in. 
Radios started to work. We managed to locate the MERV 
driver who was on Chambers Street and West Street -- 
and River Street and managed to pull the MERV down. 
Then we began to set up different sectors, so on and so 
forth. 

I spent a good portion of the afternoon with 
the MERV, the latter part of that evening with the 
communications sector, and went home, I think, two days 
later or a day and a half later, and then came back on 
something like Thursday. 

That's it. 
Q. Anything else you want to do add into it? 
Any feelings about it? Anything at all? 

A. The only thing is I'm lucky to be alive. 
That's really the bottom line. 

If the building went the other way, I was 
standing across the street, you know. You don't know 
the outcome, so that's it. 

MR. TAMBASCO: In that case, thank you for 
the interview. This is interview will be 
concluded at 1246 hours. 



File No. 9110062 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
DR. GLENN ASAEDA 
Interview Date: October 11, 2001 



Transcribed by Nancy Francis 



G. ASAEDA 

MR. MCALLISTER: This is Kevin MCALLISTER 
from the Bureau of Administration. It's October 11th, 
2001. We're in the south conference room at Fire 
Department Headquarters. It is 1536 hours and I am 
j oined by. . . 

ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER DRURY: Assistant 
Commissioner Jim Drury. 

MR. MCALLISTER: And. . . 

DR. ASAEDA: Glenn Asaeda, M.D., Deputy 
Medical Director with the Fire Department Medical 
Affairs . 

Q. DR. ASAEDA, I'd like to draw your attention 
to September the 11th, 2001, and get your recollections 
of that day, if we could. 

A. Yes. I was actually one of the physicians 
for the Office of Medical Affairs that was coming on 
duty as the on-call medical director for the system and 
was actually headed to Manhattan for an unrelated 
sexual assault task force meeting. I was actually on 
the Long Island Expressway going towards the Midtown 
Tunnel when I happened to look over to my left and 
actually did see one of the towers, what appeared to 
look like one of the top floors kind of smoking, but 
from my angle, there were four smokestacks, I guess on 



G. ASAEDA 

the Brooklyn side or the Manhattan side, just in front 
of the towers, to a point where it looked like it was 
actually smoke from the smokestacks, and I thought at 
that point, wow, that's interesting, it really makes 
the tower look like it's on fire. 

I had just taken a bioterrorism course that 
the Fire Department had offered, I think a month or two 
months before downstairs, and at that time the 
instructor from the federal government had said, do you 
know how to tell if it's a good day for bioterrorism? 
We had not known and they had explained to us that by 
looking at the smoke from the smokestack you can tell. 
If it rises straight into the air and dissipates, it's 
a bad day for bioterrorism, good for the people because 
what happens is anything released would go into the 
air, we wouldn't breathe it in. A good day for 
bioterrorism but bad for citizens would be a day where 
the smoke seems to kind of hover, even come to the 
ground, anything released could actually be inhaled. 
So, as I looked at that, I thought, oh, potentially 
this is a good day for bioterrorism. I was just 
thinking that off the top of my head. 

Then, as I was in traffic, I saw the car next 
to me honking, flashing its lights, and often in a 



G. ASAEDA 

marked car I get that. Can you tell me how to get to 
Bellevue Hospital? Can you tell me where the corner of 
this and that is? So I didn't think much of it. I 
rolled down the window only to hear the driver say, did 
you see the plane hit the World Trade Center? At that 
point I realized it was a real situation, looked back 
at the tower and thought, oh, my God, and for some 
reason I felt why is the Citywide radio so quiet? I 
didn't come to realize that, when I actually stopped 
for coffee initially, I had forgotten to put the 
Citywide back on. On my car it just doesn't 
automatically go on. 

Almost afraid to push the Citywide button, I 
pressed it, got the radio to go on and it came to life, 
and I hear the first thing, confirmed aircraft into the 
World Trade Center tower, send me everything you've 
got, and this is hard hat operation. As soon as I 
heard that, I actually got on the cell phone with 
Commissioner Claire. 

Q. Do you think that was the first or the second 
plane that had hit? 

A. That was the first plane. 

Q. Okay. 

A. At that point, realizing that Commissioner 



G. ASAEDA 

Claire was actually in Albany for a state EMS meeting, 
I actually dug into my bag, got his cell phone number, 
just to let him know, called him on the cell phone, and 
at that point I was told, I'm watching it, I'm seeing 
it on TV right now. Do me a favor and when you get in 
on scene, give me another report. So I said okay, I 
acknowledged that and started to roll in. At that 
point, also, as I'm rolling, I called my wife just to 
let her know that the plane had hit the tower, I'm 
going to go in, just watch it on the news. 

Probably about three minutes from the tunnel, 
I ducked into the tunnel with traffic with the lights 
and siren, and at that point didn't realize until later 
that communications was lost for me. I didn't know 
about the second aircraft. I think I had 1010 WINS on 
trying to hear the news. In the tunnel, I didn't hear 
any of that as well. I just remember, when I popped 
out of the tunnel, that my adrenaline was so pumped, I 
thought to myself, you've got to calm down, you've got 
to relax a little bit and just concentrate on doing 
what you have to do. 

As I popped out of the tunnel, emergency 
vehicles, marked and unmarked, from every aspect, just 
in front of me, to the side of me, behind me, and I 



G. ASAEDA 

realized that this is something I need to really be 
careful as to how I'm driving because we're not usually 
accustomed to so many vehicles going in one place. 

ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER DRURY: Excuse me. 
Doctor, you said the tunnel. Which tunnel? 
DR. ASAEDA: The Midtown Tunnel. 
ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER DRURY: Okay. 

A. At this point almost a convoy of emergency 
vehicles were going towards the World Trade Center. 
Since I was on the east side, I continued all the way 
down. As soon as I got towards the Brooklyn Bridge, I 
could see more closely the smoke and just thousands of 
people were just kind of running, walking towards the 
Brooklyn Bridge. 

Q. Were both of the buildings standing at that 
point in time? 

A. Yes, they were. 

Q. Okay. 

A. Again, still I had not realized about the 
second plane hitting the tower. Also, because of the 
bioterrorism course and just the threats, I'm thinking 
to myself, I had just imagined that it was a single 
engine Cessna type of plane, not knowing it was a 
commercial airlines by any means. I kept thinking also 



G. ASAEDA 

to myself, be careful, it still could be terrorism, it 
could be bioterrorism, they could have had some kind of 
chemicals and biological agents on board. I kept 
thinking don't go downwind, don't go downwind. But 
because of the flow of people, the direction that I was 
hoping to take ended up putting me further south, which 
actually put me directly downwind, and I remember 
thinking to myself, oh, my God, this is where I don't 
want to be. I turned off the air-conditioner, holding 
my breath, as if that would work, thinking do you know 
what? You're in the worst place. 

As I rounded the corner, more emergency 
vehicles now on the West Side Highway trying to get 
north towards the towers, the next car that I saw 
coming next to me was Chief Downey's vehicle. 

Q. So you drove all the way south down the east 
side and looped around -- 

A. Correct. 

Q. -- at the Battery and headed up West Street? 

A. Correct. Because there were too many people 
coming directly east. I knew that I couldn't go that 
way. So as I rounded the bend by the ferry, got back 
onto the west side, the next unmarked car that I saw 
was Chief Downey. Now, I don't think he was driving 



G. ASAEDA 

because I don't think I could have seen him that 
clearly, but I remember that he looked in towards the 
window of my vehicle, he smiled and actually waved, and 
I actually remember saying verbally, hey, chief, 
knowing that he couldn't hear me. But I particularly 
remember Chief Downey because I've had the opportunity 
of going on FEMA deployments with him to the Dominican 
Republic and joining him when the Japanese firefighters 
had come by, they wanted to speak to the S.O.C. chief 
and whatnot. So he was I remember physically one of 
the last people that I had known recognizing going to 
the scene. 

As the first convoy had gone in front of me, 
I actually diverted my vehicle to two ambulances that I 
had seen right under the south walkway bridge. I saw 
two ambulances, Fire Department ambulances, pulled up 
next to them and said-- 

Q. That's the south bridge that crosses the West 
Side Highway? 

A. Correct. The one that's still intact. 

Q. Right? 

A. Or was still intact. At that point, I pulled 
up next to the ambulances. I asked them, is this the 
command post? They said no, it wasn't. I said, who 



G. ASAEDA 

set you up here? I believe they were EMTs . I don't 
think they were medics. They had said, there's so many 
people running this way, we felt this was a good area 
to be in. I said, it sounds good, just make sure to 
let a lieutenant know where you are so he can account 
for everyone, and I asked them, do you happen to know 
where the command post is? They directed me to in 
front of 1 World Trade Center on the West Side 
Highway. 

Also, at this point I noticed just women's 
shoes all over. I guess they had taken them off to 
run. I guess they couldn't run in the heels and 
whatnot . 

Q. That was on West Street? 

A. That was on West Street and even previously, 
coming around from the east side to the west side, just 
shoes all over, it was just interesting to see that, 
along with the debris. 

ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER DRURY: If I may 
interrupt . 

DR. ASAEDA: Yes. 

ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER DRURY: You were 
directed to the command center on West Street across 
from 1 World Trade? 



10 
G. ASAEDA 



DR. ASAEDA: Correct. 

ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER DRURY: Did you in 
fact reach that command post? 

DR. ASAEDA: Yes, I did. 

ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER DRURY: Was that in 
front of the World Financial Center? 
DR. ASAEDA: Yes, it was. 
ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER DRURY: Okay. 
A. So as I pulled my vehicle, I realized that 
the West Side Highway had a lot of emergency vehicles. 
I couldn't actually get onto that. I went up the 
service road the wrong way with just the lights on, no 
siren at this point, saw the people gathering, I would 
say, 30 to 40 feet in front of the stairs of the World 
Financial Center. I think they call it the American -- 
I don't know if that's the same as the American Express 
Building or whatnot. 

Q. No. 3 World Financial? 

A. I would guess it would be 2, but I'm not sure 
of the number. 

Q. The American Express Building? 

A. Yes, the World Financial. I remember parking 
my car on Vesey and West on the corner, it was the 
northwest corner. There were emergency vehicles there 



11 

G. ASAEDA 



as well. I was on the end double-parked and I thought 
to myself, I don't want to block anyone. Again, not 
realizing the magnitude of what was about to happen, I 
thought to myself, I still have a meeting to go to in 
about half an hour, so once I figure out what's going 
on here and everything settles, I still need to be able 
to pull my vehicle to go to the meeting. So I parked 
my vehicle, remembered that it was a hard hat 
operation, grabbed my helmet, grabbed my jacket and 
proceeded to the command post. 

While I was en route to the site, I actually 
remember hearing the other physician's vehicle 
designation arrive on scene, so I knew that he was on 
seen probably about five to seven minutes before I had 
arrived. 

Q. Who was that? 

A. That was Dr. Cherson. 

Q. Okay. 

A. So I made it a point to, once reporting to 
the command post just to find out what was going on, to 
see if I could find the other physician as well. Since 
he was the previous physician on call and first on the 
scene, I figured I would let him take the lead and let 
him direct me as to where he wanted me to go. 



12 
G. ASAEDA 



ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER DRURY: At what time 
was it now, do you know, doctor, approximately? 

DR. ASAEDA: This must have been, I would 
say -- it turns out it was after the second aircraft 
had crashed but before the first building. I don't 
remember the exact time of the second plane, but 9:10, 
9:15, somewhere in that time frame. 

ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER DRURY: Yes. 
A. But even at this point, I still didn't 
realize that a plane had hit. Again, being so close 
and looking up, I couldn't even see the other building 
really from where I was standing. I walked over to the 
command post. At that point I remember seeing a piece 
of debris fall from the north tower, literally past us, 
and hit the World Financial Center behind us and come 
down, and the only reason I saw that is everyone was 
kind of looking up going, whoa! I kind of looked up 
and I thought, wow, this is very close. 

By the same token, I had looked up at the 
same time and noticed what I thought was debris turning 
out to be people, and at first I just couldn't imagine 
it would be people, but as they landed I was pretty 
sure it was people. I thought, well, they must be 
unconscious or falling out. Upon looking closer, there 



13 
G. ASAEDA 



were some people that seemed to be on fire coming down, 
some that looked like rag dolls coming down, but at 
least 70 percent of them actually flailed until they 
hit the ground and one, I mean, they looked like ants 
from the distance we were at, but actually looking like 
he or she wanted to get to the next window. 

I remember thinking under my breath and 
saying out loud that I could hear myself, I go, oh, my 
God, please, no, no, no, no, and they were jumping. 
I've seen people, you know, I've worked as a paramedic 
in the past in California, so I've seen people jump as 
high as 25 stories, but that was very different in that 
in that it was just kind of, oh, my gosh, and they 
hit. Here, with four times the height, it was kind of 
an oh, my God, oh, my God, oh, my God, until they 
finally hit. 

At that point I had met Dr. Cherson and the 
paramedic aide that was with him, Paramedic Delgado 
from our office as well. 

Q. Is this at the command post? 

A. This is at the command post, initially across 
the street from World Trade Center. 

Q. Who else was at the command post at this 
time? 



14 
G. ASAEDA 



A. I remember seeing Chief Ganci . I also 
remember Chief Downey speaking to Commissioner Von 
Essen walking in front of me. Also, at about this time 
Mayor Giuliani and his entourage had actually walked 
behind us, and then a couple of fire chiefs that I had 
seen from the training or whatnot, but I couldn't 
recall their names, some of the Dominican Republic 
staff as well that had been sent. 

Q. Was Commissioner Feehan there? 

A. I had briefly seen him, but I can't remember 
exactly where I had seen him. 

Q. Okay. 

A. At this point, as I was standing in front of 
the command post looking to try to take in what was 
going on, Dr. Cherson came back to me and said that 
they were going to move the command post into the lobby 
of 1 World Trade Center. So at that time he said to me 
he was going to go in there with Paramedic Delgado, 
Manny Delgado, and he wanted me to take the EMS fellow 
who was with us and go to 7 World Trade, where they had 
set up one of the first treatment areas. 

ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER DRURY: Now, was this 
going to be the EMS command post or the Fire Department 
command post? 



15 
G. ASAEDA 



DR. ASAEDA: This was going to be an EMS 
treatment area. 

A. So I agreed to it, and one of the -- I can't 
remember who it was but he actually brought over one of 
the antidote kits from one of our vehicles. I almost 
chuckled at that time thinking, even if it were, one 
kit is not enough for all the potential patients, but 
we brought it with us . We went into the loading dock 
of 7 World Trade, which was right adjacent to the 
telephone company building, I believe, on Vesey. 

Q. Right. 

A. I remember as we were walking there was smoke 
coming from the World Trade Center and what seemed to 
be in front parts of -- in retrospect, I guess it was 
parts of the plane or whatnot, debris from the plane, 
debris from the building, and I had also heard that 
there were people around, but I didn't get a close 
enough look to see what kind of status they were in. 

We walked into the loading dock where Captain 
Abdo of the Fire Department, EMS, had already 
established a treatment area, and we were using the 
START system, which is the simple triage and rapid 
transport, where we color code our victims into red for 
immediate, yellow for injury but not immediate, green 



16 
G. ASAEDA 



for walking wounded and black for dead at this point, 
and he had set up the loading dock into these separate 
areas and there were a few patients there as well. I 
remember, again, walking towards the treatment area 
thinking this is awfully close, we need to work on 
getting it a little bit further out, and I started 
seeing a few patients that were there. 

The first gentleman for some reason I 
remember particularly. He was a gentleman in his 
seventies. He had said that he was on the 59th floor 
of the first tower that got struck. He was actually 
ordering some kind of food at that cafeteria, I think 
it's at the 59th floor, I'm pretty sure, and thought 
that, when he heard the explosion, that it was the 
kitchen oven. He heard that other people said they 
don't know what it is but it's time to evacuate, so he 
actually came down the staircase, and he was just 
sitting there because he was tired he was in the. So 
green category of a walking wounded. I remember 
thinking to myself, if he was able to make it out, then 
it sounds like most people are going to be able to get 
out, and I was relieved to hear that. 

As I went to another patient, I remember a 
Secret Service or security from 7 World Trade Center 



17 
G. ASAEDA 



person saying to me, did you hear that the Pentagon 
just got hit by another plane? Again, not knowing 
about the second plane still at this point, I thought, 
oh, my God. Then he said, and there's another plane 
missing. So at that point was the first point that I 
realized that this was a terrorist -- an intentional 
act, again, not knowing that the second plane had 
already hit. 

So I thought we really need to move this out 
because I had a feeling they were going to come back 
for us. Just as soon as I had thought that, I heard 
what I thought was a jet engine plane. In retrospect, 
it turns out that it was the first tower coming down. 
We grabbed whatever patients we could, and what I did 
was I turned to my left and ducked into the little -- 
there was, I guess, a little connection between the 
lobby of 7 and the loading dock. The loading dock, I 
do remember thinking that it looked very secure, thick 
concrete and whatnot, and we all crammed, probably 
about 30 of us, into this little alcove between the 
lobby and the loading dock. 



G. ASAEDA 



and the next thing I 
noticed, that jet engine sound and then a loud crash 
and then pitch black. Then -- 

Q. Just prior to that, were there electrical 
lights where you were? 

A. Yes, there were. 

Q. Did they stay on? 

A. No, they did not. 

Q. Okay. 

A. I remember thinking that this was it for me. 
I really thought that this was another plane coming and 
I thought this was it. I remember putting the visor of 
my helmet down, grabbing the chin strap and just kind 
of squatting where I was at. After I realized that we 
actually made it through this initial whatever it was, 



19 
G. ASAEDA 



it was so dark that I actually thought they had closed 
the loading bay doors as a security measure for us, but 
it turns out it was just the debris and the smoke and 
whatnot that made it pitch black. 

Q. The doors were still open? 

A. They were still open. 

Q. Okay. 

A. I've heard in the past that, you know, these 
disasters are so dark that people put their hands in 
front of their face and couldn't see anything. I used 
to laugh at them and think how dark can that be? But 
really, it was so dark, you couldn't see the hand in 
front of your face. At that point we realized that the 
building we were in was still up, we needed to get out, 
but just didn't know where to go, a little 
disoriented. Any lighting equipment, which I actually 
didn't have, but any of the EMTs, I would say there 
were about eight of us, eight EMTs and medics, as well 
as the Captain and myself, EMS, we realized that we 
needed to get out, but none of us -- they hadn't 
brought their flashlights to the area we just dove 
into. We didn't know which way to go. People were 
yelling, I can't breathe, I can't breathe, and I 
remember from the bioterrorism course thinking, again, 



20 
G. ASAEDA 



it could be bioterrorism, that they had said that even 
if you didn't have a mask, just take your tie and put 
it on your face, that seems to eliminate 80 percent of 
what may be around you. I remember thinking, they said 
this would work, they said this would work, and tried 
to breathe through this, but still everything in my 
mouth and whatnot. 

Now, trying to make the escape out, I didn't 
know which way to go. Someone yelled, I think it's 
this way, and somebody had a camera, whether it was a 
photographer or whatnot, and I remember the person was 
flashing his camera towards us saying come towards the 
flash. So we made it to the flash, still pitch black, 
by chance met up with Captain Abdo from EMS, and I 
said, are all of our EMS people accounted for? He 
said, yes, they are. I said, then we need to get out 
of here. Then I said, oh, and we've got to get the 
patients, because at this point it was kind of, you 
know, we've got to get the patients as well, grabbed 
whoever we could. Luckily, they were for the most part 
all walking wounded, and even the ones that were lying 
were at this point up and had ducked with us. 

ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER DRURY: Let me stop 
you there, Doctor. 



21 
G. ASAEDA 



DR. ASAEDA: Yes. 

ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER DRURY: You said there 
were about 30 people you crammed into this little 
alcove or pathway from the loading area to the lobby of 
7 World Trade. 

DR. ASAEDA: Correct. 

ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER DRURY: Did you know 
any of those other people? 

DR. ASAEDA: Just the EMS personnel. I 
didn't recognize any of the Fire side personnel. Also 
I recognized one of the security personnel from 7 World 
Trade just because I used to go there weekly for the 
Mayor's PAD, public access defibrillation meeting. I 
recognized him. I also recognized the person who said 
he was either Secret Service or security, not as 
knowing him but just as he was next to me when we dove 
for cover, and then the patients who we had brought 
with us. But other than that, I didn't recognize any 
other personnel. 

A. At that point, we got to the exit, made a 
decision to evacuate, got the patients, still not 
knowing which way to go because we really hadn't been 
able to determine what actually came down or what had 
happened. The decision was either to go left or right 



22 
G. ASAEDA 



and we ended up going right, between the two buildings, 
in the alleyway on the north, which turned out to be 
the right direction because apparently there was a lot 
of debris and part of 7 down already. Also, I did 
notice as I was making my exit the sound of the 
firefighters' alarms indicating that they were down. I 
did remember that as well but just could not see 
anything . 

As we got into the alleyway, it just started 
to get a little bit lighter, almost like a dusk/dawn 
type of deal. We got through the alleyway, got half a 
block up -- I don't even remember which block that was, 
but saw one of the first ambulances, I think it was a 
Cabrini ambulance, one of the voluntary hospital 
ambulances with people just crammed on board. I made 
the decision to remove them because they were not 
hurt. I said, we have patients that are hurt. We 
loaded three or four and I remember just hitting the 
side of the ambulance and saying, go, go, go, go, and 
the driver, the EMT or medic, shouted back or looked 
back, where are we supposed to go? I said, just go 
north, just go north. So they took off. 

I saw another ambulance. At this point, 
also, I saw people from OEM. Eddie Gabriel, who is one 



23 
G. ASAEDA 



of our EMS chiefs, was over there coming in with -- I 
think he had somebody on his arm. We saw police 
officers. There were some firefighters now in gear but 
not recognizable because of the dust. I didn't 
remember any identifying markers on them either. 

ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER DRURY: Where was this 
now, Doctor? On West Street? 

DR. ASAEDA: This is actually on — let's 
see. This was West. This was Vesey. We took the 
little alleyway between the telephone building and 7 
World Trade, ended up on the next block. 

Q. Park Place? Murray? 

A. It may have been Murray. There was a parking 
lot adjacent to it. It was a smaller street. I think 
may have been Park Place. 

Q. Yes, I think so, too. 

A. Then at that point I saw some of the OEM 
people that I recognized, just happy to see that they 
were okay. I got to the next ambulance, put people on 
board. At that point my beeper was going off. It just 
seemed to be the only thing that was actually going 
off. It turned out to be my wife calling because she 
had heard that I was going, and while I'm trying to 
coordinate everybody going, I actually picked up the 



24 
G. ASAEDA 



phone and tried to dial. It didn't go through. 

Once I got them on the ambulance, I actually 
stopped and looked at the corner and saw that there was 
a pay phone and thought to myself, this is a Verizon 
phone. There's no way that would be working. I 
thought, well, I have nothing to lose at this point. I 
dug into my pocket, happened to find a quarter, the 
only change I had, and I thought to myself, it's 
probably with my luck one of those 35-cent phones 
anyway, you know, it's going to be like that. I get 
there, pick it up, it's a 25-cent call, dial tone is 
there surprisingly, dropped a quarter in and actually 
it goes through. 

My wife | |l 

knew that you were going to be there, the first tower 
came down. I said, listen, calm down. I'm okay. I'm 
not going to do anything to endanger myself further. 
I'm okay. Do me a favor, call my mom in San Francisco, 
let her know that I'm okay, and then I hung up the 
phone. I said, I'll call you when I can, and then 
proceeded back towards the north tower. 

At that point I stopped myself and thought to 
myself, you've got to be smart about this. The first 
tower came down. There's a great chance that the 



25 
G. ASAEDA 



second one might as well. So I went back up half a 
block through the parking lot and then back onto West. 

Q. You didn't know about the second plane at 
this point, but you knew the second tower was burning? 

A. I didn't even know that the second tower was 
burning because I had no information that the second 
tower was hit. 

Q. Got it. 

A. So all the way up until the Secret Service or 
the security, whoever he happened to be, told me that 
the other plane was missing, that one plane had hit the 
Pentagon and another was missing, up until that point I 
knew nothing of a potential terrorist attack. It was 
only in my mind thinking in this day and age, it could 
be terrorism, so be careful. As a matter of fact, when 
I saw all that dust come through, I thought at that 
point, while I was walking, I thought, this must be 
anthrax. I mean, that's something that definitely went 
through my mind. 

So at that point all our patients were onto 
the ambulances, our EMS group kind of disbanded, but I 
saw Captain Abdo on West and -- again, I'm not familiar 
with it. It's about one block further north of where 7 
used to be. I met him at the corner and at that point 



26 
G. ASAEDA 



we were literally thinking of going back towards 1 
World Trade, knowing that the command post was there, 
stopped ourselves thinking we've got to be smart about 
this, this is something else that might come down, and 
as we had thought that, the sound before the sight 
coming, saw the second tower actually come down and 
then heard it afterwards, at which point all of us 
turned north and started running. We got about a 
block, maybe half a block, ducked into a little alcove 
where there were probably 30 police officers, 
firefighters, again, I don't recognize any shield 
numbers or helmet numbers, against the wall, when other 
cops ran by and said, you're just not fucking far 
enough. So we turned around and ran north, at which 
point the plume of the smoke, again, kind of a warm 
feeling came by us, luckily no debris, almost kind of 
lifting us and then kind of surrounding us again. 

Then, at that point, when everything settled, 
we set up another treatment area at the corner of -- 
what corner is that? I don't recall. It's just south 
of Chambers, about a block south of Chambers. We set 
up another treatment area, started to see some of the 
walking wounded. There weren't too many people 
seriously injured. There were some firefighters that 



27 
G. ASAEDA 



were complaining of smoke, of just inhalation and 
dust. We gave them some oxygen. That I'm sure was 
tracked because I had our EMT write down the names, but 
I can't recall any names. 

There was one firefighter that he had given 
me his name, I actually wrote it down, I still have, 
saying that I'm sure they think I'm missing, please 
notify command that I'm okay. That I actually wrote 
down and I actually went to one of the chiefs and they 
took the name down, but their communications weren't 
100 percent either. So they were trying to do what 
they could. I made that initial report. 

At that point, while we were treating some 
patients and not more than maybe ten if that, they said 
there's suspicious packages around. I think the police 
officers came by and said we needed to evacuate. So we 
actually walked everyone further north another block 
and this time got to the Borough of Manhattan Community 
College and up on, I guess in their gymnasium area, up 
the stairs, we set up an area. We wanted to try to 
keep people like myself who were contaminated kind of 
out, keeping the area relatively fresh. So people who 
were covered like myself were kind of treating people 
on the outside, and those that were clean, those people 



G. ASAEDA 

were inside giving oxygen and water. 

We were probably there for about 20, 30 
minutes, when we were told that there's suspicious 
packages again, and this time people were running 
towards north again saying that there's a gas leak. So 
we evacuated everybody and started running again, and 
at this point I think we all decided we're going to get 
as far north as we could, decided to go to Chelsea, and 
I thought that was a good area because just being there 
initially realizing this was really going to be a body 
recovery, unfortunately, I thought that the ice rink 
would be a good place for a temporary morgue. I had 
heard in the past, I have a friend that works at DEA, 
that that was a huge facility. 

As a matter of fact, I took one of the 
Japanese firefighters from Tokyo, who was interested in 
that kind of thing, while he was visiting the Fire 
Department here, he wanted me to stop by there just to 
see what kind of health facilities they had to take 
back to Japan with him. So I remember actually seeing 
the facility and remembering that it was large enough 
that, if they would allow us to use that facility, that 
would be an ideal location. 

Then, as I was running, an ambulance, I don't 



29 
G. ASAEDA 



even know who it was, I think it was a volunteer 
ambulance pulled up and just yelled, Doc, jump in. We 
were jumping into the ambulance, seven other people, 
kind of all in disarray. I remember thinking what just 
happened? Then I was dropped off at Chelsea, met with 
Chief Pascale and Chief Kowalczyk, who were at that 
point for EMS command, and then we decided to set the 
hospital area there. 

About an hour after, they asked for us to 
return back to the -- I guess the Fire command post on 
Chambers and West. Then a couple hours thereafter, you 
know, we were trying to evaluate the best we could, 7 
came down. I remember running again and some of the 
Fire guys started running and stopped and I guess they 
realized that we were far away enough. But I remember 
I just kept running until -- I figured until I see 
everything down, I'll keep running. I got about a 
block and then realized, okay, maybe I was a little 
silly. But I walked back to the command post, and then 
we tried to come up with a plan. 

Then for the rest of the night we were trying 
to set up a hospital area, one at Stuyvesant High 
School, which we were able to set up, also trying to 
set up some strike teams up near the rubble pile, 



30 
G. ASAEDA 



really mainly for rescuers at this point, just 
realizing there wasn't going to be many victims, but in 
case a victim was pulled out. I was there for about 
the next, I think, total of like 28 hours on the first 
day, just trying to coordinate what we could, 
communicating with OEM as well as to the federal assets 
that were coming. We heard that the DEMAT teams were 
coming, also that the FEMA USAR task force things were 
coming . 

By this point, John Claire, Commissioner 
Claire, as well as Dr. Gonzalez and Dr. Richmond, who 
were also at the upstate meeting, were flown back 
apparently by state trooper helicopter. This was 
probably three, four hours into it, I think by 11:00 or 
12:00 in the afternoon, and they were trying to 
coordinate what they could from their site. At that 
point, Dr. Gonzalez, who is really in charge of our 
New York task force, USAR, Urban Search and Rescue 
Team, decided that he would put together some semblance 
of a team to do some of the rescue efforts. So part of 
our obligation, myself, as being the doctor there 
throughout the night, would be to cover the main 
medical command as well as the USAR activities as 
well . 



31 
G. ASAEDA 



At this same point, I heard that Dr. Prezant 
and/or Dr. Kelly had set up something at Pace, on that 
side. Initially, Dr. Cherson had set something up at 
the Liberty Street side, I think by the ferries. So I 
knew that we had good coverage in the areas . Then the 
rest of it was just trying to set up and coordinate. A 
lot of volunteers, medical staff and whatnot, came up 
very early, but I don't think they realized what 
magnitude of disaster this was. I had surgeons, I 
think 30 surgeons from a college conference at one of 
the hotels showed up by busload saying we're surgeons, 
we're here to help. I said, it would be great, but 
there's no one to pull out at this point. If you don't 
mind loading the water, that's what we're going to need 
at this point, you know, we sent everybody to Chelsea 
Piers and set up things over there. 

ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER DRURY: Did you see 
any patients that night? 

DR. ASAEDA: Yes. 

ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER DRURY: Approximately 
how many? 

DR. ASAEDA: All the patients that I saw were 
rescuers in some shape or form. None were from the 
initial collapse. A lot of things in their eyes, which 



32 
G. ASAEDA 



we washed out, some respiratory complaints, some minor 
bumps and bruises, someone that actually needed some 
sutures and whatnot. The way we had it set up was that 
anyone who needed a transport would be placed onto the 
ambulance and actually sent to the hospital because we 
also coordinated with the hospitals to find out what 
they could handle and we were told that initially they 
got some of the burns and the sick patients from the 
initial planes, but that was only a few hundred 
throughout the hospitals. We looked at Downtown 
Beekman, Bellevue, St. Vincent's, as far as Cabrini as 
well, and we were told that, after the initial wave, 
they weren't getting any patients, they were ready, so 
we knew that we didn't really need to do too much 
treatment on the scene, we would try to go back to the 
way that things are normally run in these disasters 
where we'd do an initial triage, do basic treatment 
that we can, and then ship them to the hospital. We 
felt that's where they would better be served. But it 
turned out that there weren't that many victims from 
the rubble. 

ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER DRURY: Just a couple 
other questions. 

DR. ASAEDA: Yes. 



33 
G. ASAEDA 



ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER DRURY: When did you 
find out for the first time that a second plane had hit 
the other tower? 

DR. ASAEDA: This was after, I guess after my 
initial run and as I was looking at the north tower and 
thinking of going back, they had said, yeah, did you 
hear the second plane hit that as well? Then I started 
to put things together thinking this was obviously a 
terrorist attack. But not until then, again, I think 
mainly because I was in the tunnel when the second 
plane had hit and Citywide at some spots apparently 
doesn't come through and the traffic was to hard to get 
on that I actually I got on the radio to tell them, 784 
was my identifier for the day, 784, show me 
responding. I just could not get through after about 
three attempts and just tried to go on by computer, but 
that was logged as well, so I couldn't actually log on 
that way. 

Again, in retrospect, maybe I should have had 
an FM station on. That would have at least given me 
the news. But not thinking to that extent, I just had 
1010 WINS on. It must have taken me -- you know, I 
must have found out about the first plane maybe five to 
ten minutes after it actually hit because I actually do 



34 
G. ASAEDA 



remember seeing the smoke. I was in the tunnel when 
the second plane hit, popped out probably soon 
thereafter, and then with everything was trying to get 
on scene and listen to the radio. Again, I didn't hear 
anything about a confirmed second crash, either that or 
I just wasn't paying close enough attention or just 
didn't know about the second plane. 

ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER DRURY: My other 
question has to do with West Street. 

DR. ASAEDA: Yes. 

ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER DRURY: Either when 
you were coming over to 7 World Trade for the first 
time or after you evacuated 7 World Trade after the 
first collapse, did you notice a lot of rigs and buses 
lined up on West Street from like the command post on 
down? 

DR. ASAEDA: I remember more particularly on 
West Street, the south end of West Street, between the 
south tower and the first tower, I would guess, a lot 
of vehicles, heavy fire rescue vehicles and ambulances 
as well. I don't remember as many north of Vesey. I 
do remember there was like a ladder truck on the corner 
of West and Vesey, actually on West, on the northbound 
lane facing the opposite direction. That vehicle I do 



35 
G. ASAEDA 



remember and then sporadically here and there some 
other vehicles as well. 

Where I parked my vehicle, I remember the 
vehicle I parked next to was a traffic enforcement 
vehicle, and then there were some -- they looked like I 
think it was a marked, no light, fire protection type 
vehicle I had seen as well, if I remember. 

ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER DRURY: Was your 
vehicle destroyed? 

DR. ASAEDA: Yes, it was. 

ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER DRURY: Chief Downey's 
vehicle, can you describe it, when you saw it? 

DR. ASAEDA: It was a dark-colored, unmarked 
car. I thought it was kind of particularly odd in that 
he looked to me like he was sitting in the back seat, 
behind the passenger, which would seem odd to me 
because I would think that, I guess, if he wasn't 
driving himself, he would be in the passenger's side. 
But in retrospect, he could have been in the 
passenger's side as well because he actually moved 
right past me, not very quickly but just enough for me 
to actually recognize him and say, oh, Chief, and then 
he got in front of me. Again, once we got onto West 
Street from the south end, there were probably 20 to 30 



36 
G. ASAEDA 



vehicles already parked and then another 20 vehicles 
trying to get through, so I realized that I would not 
be able to continue. As Chief Downey's vehicle went 
forward and, again, seeing the ambulances on the left, 
I decided to go there, at least just get out of the 
traffic pattern. Then that actually worked in my 
benefit because I was able to bring the vehicle up the 
side street, the service road. 

ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER DRURY: Anything else, 
Kevin? 

MR. MCALLISTER: I don't have any further 
questions. Do you have any other recollections or 
observations to share with us, Doctor? 

DR. ASAEDA: That's about everything. I 
mean, obviously, all the volunteers, I know that 
everyone had great intentions, but I guess they didn't 
realize the extent of things. Just a tragedy. 

Also, the other thing I remember is we used 
to have an EMT that worked here who was actually on the 
86th floor of the World Trade building and I thought to 
myself, he must be in there. I thought he was gone, 
very afraid to call his family, as he was afraid to 
call me. When I finally found out he was okay via the 
office here, I called him and he had said that he 



37 
G. ASAEDA 



actually was also an auxiliary firefighter here in New 
York City and had some thoughts of becoming a 
firefighter earlier. But he said as he was making his 
evacuation and seeing the firefighters come up fully 
loaded with their gear and their hoses going up to the 
floors to fight the fires, he said he was thanking 
everyone, thank you for what you do, thank you for what 
you do, and he said all thoughts of ever being a 
firefighter went right out the door for him there. 

I can only imagine what they must have been 
going through, and hearing that there's 343 
firefighters lost, initially, over 300 initially, just 
the thought of that is just tremendous, but when I 
actually saw the names on the list, it made me think 
twice again and also looking at the pictures. Now, not 
recalling the names exactly, seeing the pictures, I 
recognized one of the faces and I realized that there 
were more people that I knew through the Dominican 
Republic deployment or even through the bioterrorism 
course. I don't remember if he's a chief. I think 
it's Chief Fanning or Captain Fanning was lost as 
well. I saw his picture on that. There was another 
chief that was on that list as well that I recognized 
from the class and it's just horrific. Not that not 



G. ASAEDA 

knowing them makes any difference, but it just adds 
that personal touch that makes it really sad. 

I didn't realize that Commissioner Feehan 
actually lived in the neighborhood that I just moved to 
a couple of months ago, and so once I got off the World 
Trade Center site, I heard about his wake the night 
before and went to the funeral, and it's just very hard 
to take, as I'm sure you know. Just devastating. 

ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER DRURY: Thank you, 
doctor . 

DR. ASAEDA: Sure. Thank you very much. 

MR. MCALLISTER: Thank you very much, 
Doctor . 

DR. ASAEDA: If you need anything more, 
please let me know. 

MR. MCALLISTER: I'm just going to conclude 
the interview it's 1612 hours on October 11th and we 
are concluding the interview. Thank you. 



File No. 9110070 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
LIEUTENANT ROY DAVID 
Interview Date: October 12, 2001 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



R. DAVID 2 

MS. BASTEDENBECK: Today's date is 
October 12th, 2001. The time is now 8:20 
a.m. my name is Christine Bastedenbeck from 
the New York City Fire Department. I'm 
conducting an interview this morning with 
the following individual. 

Please state your name. 

LIEUTENANT DAVID: Lieutenant Roy 
David, emergency medical service. 

MS. BASTEDENBECK: Where are you 
assigned? 

LIEUTENANT DAVID: Battalion 8, 
Manhattan south. 

MS. BASTEDENBECK: Also present for the 
interview is -- 

MR. ECCLESTON: Christopher Eccleston 
of the New York City Fire Department. 
Q. Lieutenant David, can you tell us about 
the events of September 11th, 2001, that morning. 
A. September 11th, 2001, at approximately 
8:50 in the morning I was assigned to the 
academy, the second week of an EMT refresher 
course. 

While on a break just in front of the 



R. DAVID 3 

academy, I was informed of an airplane crash into 
the World Trade Center. Subsequently this event 
was confirmed, and we were informed that we would 
be mobilized to the location. 

There was a delay in obtaining vehicles 
for us to leave in. However, during that time 
some members, both of the ALS refresher and of 
the BLS refresher, were placed in ambulances, 
equipped and dispatched to the location. We then 
were placed aboard one Fire Department bus and 
two Transit Authority buses and in convoy, led by 
Chief McFarland, we responded into Manhattan. 

Upon arrival in Manhattan, we were 
prestaged at a total of three locations prior to 
getting into the work area. The first one was 
the Pearl Street side of One Police Plaza. We 
stayed there approximately 35 minutes. The 
second one was Broadway just north of Chambers 
Street, half a block south of 26 Federal Plaza. 
Then we wound up at Church and Worth. There was 
some concerns about the 26th Federal Plaza being 
a potential hot spot, so we moved from there over 
to Church and Worth. That's an approximate. But 
it was on Church in the vicinity of Worth. 



R. DAVID 4 

Then we were brought into the -- excuse 
me. I have to request the name of that high 
school, the one -- 

Q. Stuyvesant. 

A. Stuyvesant High School, which is just 
to the west of West Street approximately two 
blocks north of the site. 

At that point all the members that were 
on board the three buses were directed into the 
high school to assist there and be dispatched to 
other locations, and I was directed by an unknown 
person at this time to report to the command post 
to Chief Kowalczyk. 

Upon arrival at the command post, Chief 
Kowalczyk directed me over to 225 Broadway. 
There in command of the medical treatment area, 
which included doctors and nurses, was Chief 
Charles Wells. I was eventually brought back to 
the command post by Charles Wells and then 
redispatched back to that location. 

When I was sent back to the location 
the second time, I was armed with a list of units 
that were to be released from the scene and 
redeployed back into 911 due to the high call 



R. DAVID 5 

volume. 

While I was in the process of releasing 
those units and working it out with Captain Race 
who was left in charge of the medical operation, 
I was approached by a clergyman from the Federal 
Bureau of Investigation who informed me that Fire 
Department chaplain Father Mychal Judge had 
expired and was in the Church and was in need of 
transport . 

I quickly grabbed one of the units that 
I had that I was in the process of releasing and 
directed them to pick up and move Father Judge. 
When that was accomplished, I remained at the 
medical post assisting and also assisting with 
the move. We transferred the operation from the 
225 Broadway to the lobby of Pace University. 

At Pace University we had --we set 
up -- I'm sorry, we set up in that lobby of that 
building, the lobby and the actual whole first 
floor. There was a threat of collapse of 
building number seven, so 225, we had to evacuate 
it. 

While operating at Pace University in 
the lobby of the building, building number seven 



R. DAVID 6 

or tower seven did in fact collapse and create a 
hazard on our side. But luckily we didn't lose 
anybody. No one was injured as a result of it, 
and we continued the operation. 

I stayed there until approximately 
11:00 at night, at which point I was brought back 
to the command post and just assisted with some 
miscellaneous tasks. I probably left the scene 
at 1:30, and I secured a ride out of there with 
Chief James Martin. 

Q. Can you just give me a little more 
detail when you approached about Father Judge? 

A. I was approached by, again, an unknown 
priest from the Federal Bureau of Investigation, 
since that was the jacket he was wearing, and he 
stated to me that Father Judge had expired 
approximately two hours ago. 

When I went into the Church, in fact he 
had been pronounced by Dr. Kelly sometime 
earlier. At this point they just wanted to 
remove him up to his perish so that I guess he 
could be prepared for the next step. 

He appeared to have an injury, a heavy 
bleeding injury to the left side of the rear of 



R. DAVID 7 

his head, and it was obvious that he was also 
covered in debris, as his face and the rest of 
his body was covered with just I guess crushed 
mortar and brick matter. 

Q. So you picked him up from what church? 

A. I don't know the name of the Church. 
It's on -- I'd have to refer to the map. 

Q. I'm not sure if that map covers 
everything . 

A. Yeah, let me just see. Let me orient 
myself here. It was St. Paul --no. St. Peter's 
Church, which was on Barclay Street between 
Church and Broadway. 

Q. So you assigned a unit there to -- 

A. Well, there were several units there 
that were operating supporting the medical unit 
for transport. As they were being released, this 
is the time that I was approached by this priest 
and asked for help. 

A member from my command by the name of 
Carpenter was on one of the units I believe like 
an 8 Mary or something, perhaps an extra unit 
that had been running for the day. He was on 
that unit, and he was the one that did the 



R. DAVID 8 

removal. I can't recall who his partner was at 
the time. 

Q. And then they removed Father Judge to 
where? 

A. They removed Father Judge to his 
parish, which is located on 31st Street. It's 
just opposite a fire station, I believe. 

Q. Engine Company 1? 

A. Yes. 

Q. That's where they left his body? 

A. Yes. They took him there, and I 
believe that's where they left him. 

Q. Do you have any other comments you'd 
like to make at this time regarding the events 
that morning? Anything you say is fine. 

A. Okay. My only concern was that -- and 
again this is not a bad mark against anyone. But 
knowing that at any time the personnel in the 
academy can be deployed, I think that the 
department should provide buses or some other 
type of mass people mover vehicles there, 
deadlined, ready to be moved. Because the only 
thing that we had that we could depend on was a 
few ambulances, and it just wasn't enough to move 



R. DAVID 5 

60, 70 people from the academy. 
Q. That's it? Okay. 

MS. BASTEDENBECK: This concludes our 
interview with Lieutenant Roy David. We 
thank you very much for your comments. The 
time now is 831 hours. 



File No. 9110071 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

EMT FAISEL ABED 

Interview Date: October 12, 2001 



Transcribed by Elisabeth F. Nason 



F. ABED 

MR. ECCLESTON: Today's date is October 12, 

2001. The time is 747 hours. This is Christopher 

Eccleston of the New York City Fire Department. 

I'm conducting an interview with the following 

individual. 

Q. Please state your name, rank, title, assigned 
command area of the Fire Department of the City of New 
York regarding the events of September 11, 2001. 

A. My name is Faisel Abed. I'm an EMT assigned 
to Battalion 8 and my unit is 08 David 2. 

Q. Also present in the room is -- 

A. Christine Bastedenbeck of the New York City 
Fire Department. 

Q. Were you assigned to the World Trade Center 
disaster on September 11, 2001? 

A. Originally, basically we weren't assigned, 
but we heard so much commotion over the radio, we 
decided, you know, we asked Central, send us and we 
went even as they dispatched us to the World Center. 

Q. Who were you working with that day? 

A. Charles Beshett. 

Q. So they assigned you to the World Trade 
Center? 

A. Yes, I mean there was so much noise when the 



F. ABED 

first call came over, everybody just went like 
ballistic over the radio. Whoever was there. There 
was 01 Adam that was like the under the building at 
that time and then there were a couple of other units 
that said we will go, we will go. We said we will take 
you. It sounded legit. It did sound legit, but in the 
back of our of minds, we thought maybe it's one of the 
generators that blew up, something electrical, 
something mechanical. It's just such a tall building, 
things happen, you know. 

So we asked Central to send us the job and we 
are driving down 34 Street and we get to 23 Street and 
you see tower one. It's like oh, shit, oh, god. Look 
at this. The first thing that comes to your mind is 
oh, it's an act of god, it ' s a terrible tragedy. I 
mean you think you know -- you look at it and say -- 
it's not the first time a plane hit a building. You 
had the Empire State Building. My parents told me back 
in 1945 when a big bomber hit the building, so it's an 
accident, god, it ' s a tragic accident. 

But then we are driving and now we are like, 
we are about a half mile out, halfway from the World 
Trade Center and we see this shiny object coming and me 
and my partner are going, what the hell, what's wrong 



F. ABED 

with that plane. What is wrong with that plane. There 
is something not right with that plane. And he just -- 
the tower blew. 

So my partner said stop the freaking bus, 
stop the freaking bus. The building's going to fall. 
The building's going to fall on us. It was coming -- 
the force -- you see like the -- shit, the whole top of 
the building go off and just the junk that was coming 
out of there and the explosion was -- I thought it was 
Hollywood. I thought this was an act. I said this 
can't be happening. In New York. It's not happening. 

I slowed it down. He got scared and I got 
scared so we kind of just slowed down a bit, you know, 
and he says listen, we really can't go in there. There 
is too much coming off the building. You could see 
stuff flying out of the building and people way before 
you get there. So we do it. We go, we go. We finally 
go to Vesey and West. Turned there. 

There was a couple of other units there. 
They set the staging area up. We had about 15, 20 
people coming out of the building and there were nurses 
from, they're from AMEX. I think they are from the 
American Express building. A couple of their nurses. 
They were bringing patients out. They were sitting 



F. ABED 

down right on the sidewalk. Some were badly burned, 
some were injured. Some were just in shock. Basically 
we are there. We are treating some. 

Q. Could you indicate where you parked your 
vehicle. 

A. Here is north, we are right here. I would 
say we are right here. Exactly right here. We are 
right here. 

Q. Just make a number 1 there. 

A. Okay. We were right here. West and Vesey 
and the water is right here and you can't go past the 
water . 

Q. Okay, what vehicle were you in? 

A. 350. 

Q. 350? 

A. 350. 

So what happened at that point we get out. 
We get out our stuff, we are just starting to take care 
of the patients. We are tagging them red, yellow, 
whatever color might be at that situation at that 
time. We were there on the scene maybe -- I know the 
second plane hit a little bit after nine, if I'm 
correct. If I remember. We got our stuff out. We 
started triaging the patients. We stayed right there. 



F. ABED 

I mean we didn't go any further because of the fact 
that it was just a dangerous situation. 

We stayed there, people were coming out and 
we triaged them. We were there, I would say 
approximately maybe an hour. I know it started -- I 
think that building starting coming down around 10 
o'clock or something like that. I don't exactly 
remember what time, but it was about that time the 
first tower came down. 

Q. We have the time. 

A. Yes, I don't remember exactly, but I know it 
did come down, the first building, right. 9:55. About 
an hour from when we were first there. With the grace 
of god we had gotten all the people out of there. We 
had gotten all the patients out of there. They were 
transported and everything. 

Next thing you know, you hear another -- they 
had said there were jets out there that day. They were 
out there. I started to hear another jet, right, it 
sounded like a flush of a jet. What it was was 
actually the building coming down. I didn't actually 
see the building coming down but you heard it. Why I 
didn't see it, I don't know. We were just so busy 
concentrating on what we are doing. You just heard 



F. ABED 

this thrushing, thrushing noise like a rocket. I 
thought the building was under attack again. 

You just start seeing this smoke coming 
down. We just took off. We went north. We actually 
-- sorry, we went west. We went towards the river. 
All right. Then we just went towards the river and 
went up north a little bit behind the building. That 
was after the first one went down. 

Q. Were you still with your partner at that 
time? 

A. No. At that time, forget it, we were gone. 
We separated. It was just one of those things. We 
separated. I was looking for him. He was looking for 
me. I asked all around if -- someone told me he saw 
him. He was okay. I heard at one point that he went 
to the hospital with another co-worker of mine, but 
that wasn't true. 

We were there, I would say for maybe another 
20 minutes, half an hour or so, and then the second 
building came down, so we had to run even more 
further. We ran up north further, and then what 
happened we ran into the school. Actually the school 
was coming out, Stuyvesant High School, the kids 
started coming out. They didn't have a clue what was 



F. ABED 

going on. 

So we have like 3, 4,OQ0 kids coming out of 
the school, not realizing the magnitude of what's going 
on. So we are starting to walk. Now it's coming down 
and we are starting to walk, but the school is funny, 
the school is like a break wall for the smoke that is 
coming from the building, so when the kids got past one 
end of the school they started panicking. So we all 
started getting nervous, because the only place else to 
go was the Hudson River. I'm a good swimmer, but the 
Hudson River? 

So I started telling the kids, everybody, 
just calm down, everybody keep on walking. Keep on 
walking, keep on walking. We finally got out to West 
Street and went just go all the way up till we stayed 
at the -- what's the place up there. 

Q. Chelsea Pier? 

A. Yes, Chelsea Piers. After that, then there 
was a gas leak. There was another explosion, the gas 
went. At that point it was just total helplessness. 
We felt terrible. We felt bad. 

Q. Where your vehicle was left -- 

A. The vehicle was left right there. It was 
left right there at West and Vesey Street. Just left 



F. ABED 

it there, left everything. Just left everything. They 
tell you if running, don't look back. I was running 
looking back, making sure that cloud was coming, 
because it was coming. It was a horrific cloud. 

It was like this monster coming out of the 
sky that was going to swallow you up. Then I noticed 
people jumping off the building. I caught this one guy 
over there. My eye caught him. It was just one of 
those things. My eye caught him. I was watching. 
That's pretty much it. 

Q. Once you got to the Chelsea Piers, and they 
had you staged there -- 

A. Well, I tell you, everybody --it was so 
-- at that point, at that point, I think right after 
the first building collapsed, people were just walking 
around. They didn't know what to do. Everybody was 
just walking around. I was walking around like I lost 
my little puppy. I was definitely just total shaken. 
Forget it. 

It got more organized at one point. At one 
point it started to get organized. I think after the 
second building went down, it finally started to get 
organized. Started getting all the ambulances lined up 
on West Street. It just really started to get 



10 

F. ABED 



organized, but like I said, there wasn't really much 
for us to do. You had 400 ambulances there, just 
idling their engines. Not really doing anything. It 
was a shame. 

If you ask me, can we ever prepare ourselves 
for something like this, not this magnitude. Not this 
magnitude, no. This was something else way beyond our 
comprehension and something that we, you know, can 
never handle again. It's impossible. It really is. 
As much training as we get, MCIs and things like that 
every year, I never want to see this again. I really 
don't. 

I'm staged by the Empire State Building, so 
every time I stage by the Empire State Building, I'm 
like, I'm looking up all the time now. I mean I'm just 
like, oh. My partner is saying what are you looking 
at? Terrible terrible thing, really was. 

Q. Did you eventually get to finding your 
partner? 

A. Thank god, yes. We hugged each other. We 
gave a big hug, yes, we found each other. 

Q. How long were you separated? 

A. Almost until -- Jesus, almost until -- it had 
to be afternoon, one o'clock, 1:30, 2:00. I finally 



11 

F. ABED 



found him down around the command center. What 
happened was that I had gotten pulled off. I had a 
Chief come pick me up and drive me to the hospital, 
because our Captain was hurt, so he saw me walking up 
the street and he says do you have a unit? I said no, 
he says hop in with me and he took me up to the 
hospital. 

Q. Who was your Captain? 

A. Captain Stone. 

Q. Okay. He had gotten hurt on the scene? 

A. Apparently. Now that I've opened my mouth, 
I'm sorry, but he actually escaped. He was in the 
building. He almost -- from what I know, he almost -- 
escaped with his life just about. He really did. You 
didn't hear this from me, please. I'm afraid I'm 
opening a can of worms. 

Q. No, you are not, no. 

A. He almost escaped with his life. He really 
did. He just missed it. The building almost fell on 
him. 

Q. Thank goodness he got out. 

A. Yes, he got out. So I was in the command car 
with him. He drove me up to Bellevue and then I was 
told to take the command car and I went back downtown 



12 
F. ABED 



to the command center. That was pretty much it. 

Q. Is there anything else you would like to add 
to this regarding the events from the time the plane 
hit until about 12 noon? 

A. It was just mass chaos. That's all I could 
say. It was just mass chaos. I think everybody was 
just saying, you know, there really isn't much we can 
do when the buildings went down and that we just got to 
look out for ourselves and take care of ourselves. 
That's basically what it was. We were just taking care 
of ourselves. We had no choice. 

If we get hurt, who are we going to help. It 
was just basically be safe, keep yourself, keep your 
distance, keep your ears open, keep your radios open to 
see what was going on. That's pretty much the whole 
thing in a nutshell. 

MR. ECCLESTON: Thank you very much for 

conducting this interview with me. This interview 

is concluded at 758 hours. The counter on the 

cassette recorder is 194. 



File No. 9110072 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMT JAMES MCKINLEY 
Interview Date: October 21, 2001 



J. MCKINLEY 

CHRISTOPHER ECCLESTON: It's October 12, 2001. The time is 6:56 and 
this is Christopher Eccleston of the Fire Department of the City of New York. I am 
conducting an interview with the following individual. . .please state your name, rank, 
title, assigned command area of the Fire Department of the City of New York regarding 
the events of September 11, 2001. 

JAMES MCKINLEY: My names is James McKinley, EMTD. I work out 

of Battalion 8, my shield is 5501. 

CHRISTOPHER ECCLESTON: Also present at the interview is. . . 

CHRISTINE BASTEDENBECK: Christine Bastedenbeck from the New York 
City Fire Department. 

Q: James, were you assigned to the World Trade Center disaster of 
September 11, 2001? 

A: Yes. 

Q: Can you tell me about the events that happened that day? 

A: Basically I was just getting off duty when news came in, the MERV driver 
came in and said there's a plane into the World Trade Center. He took off in a hurry, I 
was about to go home, and I convinced my lieutenant to let me go to the MCI. So I went, 
and after watching it on the TV for maybe 2, 3 minutes, I was about to put my stuff in my 
locker and I decided that I had to go to this thing. I went down and I grabbed Smitty, 
who was working cleaning the vehicles. We stocked the vehicle, 169, with the 
lieutenant's permission, and we went to the MCI. As we were going down the 



J. MCKINLEY 
FDR, I remember looking over and just seeing this huge hole in the World Trade Center. 
As we're going down, we went down the FDR, as we were coming across. . .1 wasn't 
driving, I was teching. I remember coming up on the Trade Center, I don't know when 
the plane went into the building or how long it was there, but it was like, I was amazed to 
see that PD were already escorting people over the Brooklyn Bridge and to Chinatown. 
They were just clearing the whole area, and having people migrate towards Chinatown 
and over the bridge. So we came out of the FDR, we came across Vessey Street, and we 
were told by the radio to go to staging on West and Vessey. As we're going past we met 
command. I don't remember who it was. I remember seeing one, Gumbo, who was a 
lieutenant. I'm not sure what he is now. 

Q: Chief? 

A: Chief Gumbo, okay. So we parked out vehicles on Vessey street, I guess 

on the west side of the West Side Highway. 

Q: Can you just mark on the map with a number 1 where you parked your 
vehicle? Approximately, it doesn't have to be exact. 

A: There was like 15, 20 vehicles there already, and we just joined in the 
group. So I would guess about here. 

Q: What was the vehicle number you were in? 

A: 169. Then we were just waiting for orders from officers on the scene 
about what to do, and they told us just hang tight. My partner is telling me that they want 
us to stay by our vehicles, in case they find something to do. I wasn't communicating 
with the officers, my partner was. I was just standing by the vehicle watching the 



J. MCKINLEY 
firemen do their stuff, watching the PD do their stuff. That's basically about it, I was just 
taking in the sight of the whole thing. Debris falling from the buildings, smoke, basically 
mayby this was a bad idea. Keep going? 

Q: Keep going, you're doing fine. You're doing perfect. 

A: As I was standing there watching this whole thing unfold, it was like I 
couldn't believe that some people were actually jumping from the building. Then as I 
looked up, I saw this helicopter hovering from in front of one of the buildings, it was the 
first one that was hit. Then all of a sudden I heard this huge explosion, I didn't know 
what it was cause nobody was telling me anything. I didn't know until we were called 
back to Chambers and something, Chambers and West Street, that it might have been a 
terrorist attack. I was this close to it, and I didn't know what was going on. After that I 
heard this huge explosion, I thought it was a boiler exploding or something. Next thing 
you know this huge cloud of smoke is coming at us, so we're running. Everyone is, 
firemen, PD, everyone is running away from the World Trade Center, up Vessey Street. 
This is North End, we was running around Vessey and around North end to get away 
from the first smoke. After the first building, I guess, I didn't know at the time that the 
building fell. After the smoke cleared, I went back, I was helping some people that were 
covered in dust and stuff like that. We set up treatment right on Vessey and North End, 
over here. As I was getting stuff to go into the treatment area, BP cuff, water, 0-2, stuff 
like that, I was instructed to go back and treat patients. As I was picking up a patient on 
Vessey, on the east side of the West Side Highway and Vessey, I didn't know what was 



J. MCKINLEY 
going on. I was just trying to treat patients. I put a fireman on a stretcher, I was leading 
him back to the treatment area. As I was getting to the treatment area, everyone is 
leaving the treatment area. I was like where is everybody going? They said the other 
building is leaning, we're getting out of here. We're moving the treatment area. So we 
put the fireman in an ambulance and they took off. We was trying to clear out the 
treatment area, and as we're clearing the treatment area, I hear this huge noise. Someone 
told me the building is exploding, I couldn't believe it. So we started moving the 
treatment area back even further. After the second one fell, we started running 
up. . .where is it? I'm not sure what these buildings represent, but we ended up down by 
the water, the cloud pushed us all the way to the water. And that's basically, after that it 
was like, we went back to survey the damage and we was trying to get our vehicles out of 
the rubble. Like after the first building fell, we were trying to recover, we were trying to 
move the vehicles off of Vessey Street and on to North End Avenue. I'm like moving 
vehicles, I'm helping people, we have this one fireman that had his arm — it was 
deformed, it was broken and everything. I helped splint it. I tried to move four or five 
vehicles before I set up staging over near the treatment area. After we moved, we moved 
the treatment area like three times. We moved it around here. Then after the first one fell 
we tried to get back in there. Then the second one was falling, I don't know. After the 
first one fell, as I went back, I was just looking at it. There were vehicles on fire, there 
were ambulances too close to fire trucks burning, gas tanks were popping. The parking 
lot over here where we parked our vehicles, cars in the parking lot were on fire. 



J. MCKINLEY 
Q: That was the parking lot over here? 

A: I think this was a parking lot over here. I think this was a parking lot too, 
cause as we were running when the second building. . ..this fireman was in front of us and 
we ran into almost like a dead end. As we're running behind him, he's like, "this way". I 
think he was a fireman or a police man, if we had followed him, we would have wound 
up in a dead end, and we probably would have got smoke in our lungs so we noticed that 
going in here would be a dead end, we have to go down this way. After the first one fell 
I was running up Vessey, then I walked back down Vessey towards West Street where all 
the fire engines were. They were covered in debris and they're smoldering. I just 
couldn't believe it. What amazed me too was things you don't even take notice of. Like, 
the street was littered with paperwork that was in the office building. I can't remember 
anymore, you know. 

Q: It's ok, you're doing a perfect job. Just keep going with what you're 
doing. 

A: After the first one fell, I was trying to sort through everything, going 
around helping people, seeing what we could do. Once I got too close to a vehicle that 
was smoking, it started to pop, I was afraid that the gas tank would explode. Everyone 
was like watch your back, watch your back, the firemen were trying to put out the fire. I 
keep reading in the paper now that it was at this point that they was trying to get the guys 
out of the other building that hasn't fallen yet. I can just imagine what it must have been 
like running down the stairs in the World Trade Center. As I was saying before, I didn't 



J. MCKINLEY 
know what was going on. I didn't even know that the building had fallen. Maybe it was 
the overtime or the fact that I had worked all night, I was tired or whatever. But as we 
cleared the second building, our dispatcher kept telling us after the second one fell, told 
us to drop back to Chambers and West Side Highway. We had to go back to our vehicles 
that we had abandoned running from the building that had fallen. We thought it was 
gonna fall on the side, so I was running looking for the shadow of the building, hoping 
that it wasn't falling my way. If it was falling my way, I would want to know because I 
don't want to stop running to look back to find out which way it was falling. I had to 
find out a way to see if it was falling this way, if it was falling on me. For some reason it 
fell like this. So as we ran, we came back to move all the vehicles, get all the stuff out. I 
was trying to fall back to Chambers and West Side Highway. Then, I met my partner, we 
had lost each other when the building side collapsed. He was telling me, as I'm driving 
the vehicle up the West Side Highway, all of a sudden, there's my partner standing in the 
road there. I'm like, ah, there he is. I'm not sure if he got the order before I did, cause I 
was told to drop back to Chambers and West Side Highway. So, I parked the vehicle up 
there, and I went back, and we're standing. He's like, he told me that the guy, the 
terrorist? 

Q: Osama Bin Laden? 

A: Yeah. He's like, he said he was gonna get the World Trade Center. So 
I'm like, what are you talking about? He said, this is a terrorist attack. I'm like what? 
Then all of a sudden, he told me that something was happening in Washington too. Then 



J. MCKINLEY 
he told me that they shot down another one. They said that the Air Force shot one down 
in Pennsylvania. But they later found out that they had a struggle. At this point, 
something happened. I think we heard some explosions or something, so the dispatcher 
starts telling us to go up to 23 rd street and Chelsea Piers. My partner's like maybe it's gas 
or something, not just explosive gas. Not like Con Edison gas but like sarin gas or 
something like that. So we're packing everything up again, helping civilians who 
stopped to see this thing. So we pulled it up to 23 rd Street and Chelsea Pier, that's where 
we made staging. Basically after that, once we got to 23 rd Street, we started to see other 
vehicles were coming already. They told us to fall back, they told everybody that was 
responding in to go to 23 rd Street, cause there was ambulances there already. So we got 
in line, steadied our pulses, dusted ourselves off, kind of like composed ourselves. And 
then there were lieutenants going around asking for unit numbers. After that it was just a 
big rotating in, at least 75-100 vehicles down there on 23 rd street, all over. As we stayed 
there hour after hour, they kept coming from all over the state. Upstate, Jersey, 
Pennsylvania, we seen them from all over the state. As you stayed there they kind of 
like, rotated you in. If you were up front and they needed ambulances down there, they 
would send them down. We lost everything down there. I lost my tech bag, the only 
thing I didn't loose was the things that I had on me: my stethoscope, my helmet, my 
jacket. We even lost our stretcher. I don't know if we put in for it or not, but basically 
that's all it was. We got down there, we reported to the lieutenant. Then when the 
buildings started falling, we started falling back, the dispatcher telling us where to go. 
Chambers, then 23 rd street. 



J. MCKINLEY 
Everything like, hold on a sec, they ran out of planes to drop on us. So everything started 
becoming a little more predictable, Fire and PD performing their duties. 

Q: Were you guys getting any news reports like what was happening? Like 
all the planes had been grounded and that information? 

A: I thought that was great too. They said over the radio that they ordered all 
the planes across the country to just hit the ground. Anyone up after a certain time would 
be shot down. As you stand at 23 rd street, we saw there was fighter jets cruising the air 
and stuff. The people at the 23 rd street pier, they saw the ambulances there, they heard 
the news. They started bringing out bottled water for us, they started setting out tables. I 
don't know if they have some kind of disaster plan that they followed, but they were very 
nice. They started bringing out water, bread, then sandwiches started appearing later on, 
fruit, apples. They made the whole facility at our disposal. I don't know if that's — but 
I was very amazed at the way they responded to the situation. I sat there for like 2 or 3 
hours waiting to go back in, but they never sent me back there. I thought they would, but 
they wouldn't. Even the hospitals were surprised at how few patients they got. Basically 
that's about it. 

Q: What time did you end up working till that day? 

A: Well, we waited at 23 rd Street pier, and then finally a lieutenant put us 
back in service, back into the 911 system. We did one call and we went to this 
Gouvaneer hospital, picked up a young lady. I call them young, but she was in like her 
70s. She was being treated there, being transported back over to Bellvue Hospital. I 



10 

J. MCKINLEY 
didn't know that you're not supposed to take a stable patient not part of the incident, 
Ground Zero, back to Bellvue. So I went to Bellvue, and all the doctors are expecting 
something from Ground Zero, and this lady's from Gouvaneer. So the doctor's like oh, 
okay, we'll treat her anyway. Well, he didn't say anyway, not that attitude. After that, I 
went back to the station, we had to re-start the vehicle before we brought this patient up. 
We went back in the 911 system and over to Bellvue. Then I went back, and I started 
work that night at about 10:00. I didn't get off till the lieutenant. . .1 worked something 
like twenty hours that night, until 6:00. Then I went upstairs to the locker room. I think I 
was tired but I wasn't tired. I slept on a bench maybe an hour or an hour and a half. 
Went out, got something to eat, came back, washed up, put on my spare uniform and 
reported to duty about 12:00 that night. I don't remember, what did I do when I came 
back on duty? I think they sent us over to the Chelsea Pier, with all the other 
ambulances. All those other ambulances from all over the state was just standing by 
there. I guess they came down, they wanted to go down to Ground Zero. They didn't like 
sitting at 23 rd street. They wanted to go down there, help do something. The bosses say 
you gotta sit here, you gotta sit here. That's basically what happened. EMS went on 12 
hours on and 12 off. I finally got home the next night, took a shower, felt good, fell 
asleep. That's about it, unless you have any other questions. 

Q: No, is there anything else you would like to add to this in regard to the 
events that happened prior to noon that day? 

A: Before the planes hit? Something I observed? 



11 

J. MCKINLEY 

Q: From when the planes hit until approximately noon. Is there anything in 
there that you want to add other than what you've already told us? 

A: Urn... like...? 

Q: Just, if there's something that you thought of that you forgot to tell us, that 
you want to tell us. If there's nothing, that's fine, you can, you know. . .that's fine also. 

A: I don't know, basically that's about it. 

Q: Okay. 

A: But what I found amazing was that nobody knew what was going on. I 
didn't know what was going on. I think that if we had known that these people would 
have done something like this, and that this is what it was. . .1 usually watch the planes. 
They usually go from south to north, so when I heard the news about a plane hitting that 
side of the building, the plane would have had to been going from north to south. I 
thought it was an accident. That's what I was working on, down on the scene. It was a 
horrible accident, this guy was maybe coming out of Newark, and to avoid another plane, 
he swerved and couldn't get control of the plane. I think that if all of us would have 
some idea of what was transpiring, it would have been a lot different. Basically, I can't 
say, I don't know if that's enough. 

Q: Perfect. James, I thank you very much for conducting this interview with 
me. The time is 7:21. The counter on the recorder is 373 and this interview is concluded. 



File No. 9110073 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMT JOHN JAGODA 
Interview Date: October 12, 2001 



J. JAGODA 

CHRISTOPHER ECCLESTON: Today's date is October 12, 2001. The time 
is 0627 hours, and this is Christopher Eccleston of the Fire Department of the City of 
New York. I am conducting an interview with the following individual. . .please state 
your name, rank, tide, assigned command area of the Fire Department of the City of New 
York regarding the events of September 11, 2001. 

JOHN JAGODA: My name is John Jagoda, my badge number is 3378, 1 work 
out of Station 13, Battalion 8. 

Q: John, were you assigned to the World Trade Center Disaster on September 
11 th , 2001? 

A: Yeah. When I received a phone call at home, I asked if I should come in 
and I came in on my bicycle, met with another guy here and we went down there. 

Q: En route to the assignment what did you see? 

A: A lot of smoke, a lot of fire. People just scared in the streets, it was from a 
distance away, but it was very scary to see. 

Q: When you arrived at the World Trade Center, where did you park your 
vehicle? 

A: It was right around Broadway, I guess, and Vessey Street. 

Q: Can you just indicate there on the map with a number 1 where you parked 
your vehicle? 

A: Around here. 



Q: Thank you. Did any civilians report anything to you when you first 
arrived? 

A: Well, when we first arrived the building had just collapsed I guess just five 
minutes after we got there. It was pitch black for awhile, and as the smoke cleared, two 
men were dragging a female cop over to us who was having chest pain and couldn't 
breathe. Another cop came over who had chest pains and couldn't breathe. Then there 
was another gendeman who asked us to help him, his arm was almost off. I mean, from 
the elbow down it was just bones ripped apart. There were so many other people. We 
just did what we could handle. We handled those three patients and took them to the 
hospital. 

Q: You said when you arrived the building was coming down, which tower 
was this that was coming down? Was it the first one or the second? 

A: It was the first one. Because we had brought the patients over to Bellvue, 
and were on our way back when we heard that the second one had come down. 

Q: Okay, what happened next? 

A: Well, we got those people in the ambulance and brought them to Bellvue. 
It was just total disbelief, you know? Everybody at Bellvue was waiting for us. We 
basically just washed our hands then turned around and went back. We knew there was 
gonna be a lot of people down there. 

Q: When you said you went to Bellvue, who were you talking about we? 

A: Me and my partner, and the two officers, and the one male who's arm was 
pretty badly mangled. 

Q: Who was your partner? 



A: Pete Rosie, he works up at Harlem. He lives not too far from here, so he 
rode his bicycle also. 

Q: Okay, so you brought these patients to Bellvue, and then what happened 
next? 

A: We cleaned up and then just went right back down. 

Q: Okay. 

A: When we got down there we were on the opposite side, I think near 
Washington Street or Greenwich Street. As a matter of fact, we were on Church street, 
maybe Church and Park. 

Q: Okay, can you just indicate on the map with a number 2 where you parked 
your vehicle? 

A: Right there. 

Q: Okay, what vehicle was that? 

A: 340. 

Q: 340? Okay. 

A: From there we met up with a group of other ambulances and supervisors 
over that were there and just kind of waited. From there I can't remember. 

Q: Okay, just to the best of your memory. . . 

A: It was just a bad day, it was a terrible day. I just want to put it out of my 
mind to tell you the truth. 

Q: I'm sure. When you arrived back at the scene, had the second tower come 
down already? 



A: Yeah. It came down. . .as we were leaving here, heading back down we 
heard over the radio that the second tower had fallen. So we all went to let's see. . .is this 
Washington here? 

Q: This is Washington here. 

A: This is West? 

Q: This is West Street and this is West End 

A: Yeah, we were all right here, by West Street here and we were down by 
the West Side Highway and Barkley. 

Q: You were staged there? 

A: Yeah. 

Q: Who were you staged with? You reported to a particular officer there? 

A: I honestly don't remember, there were so many people. I'm also a MERV 
driver, so at one point I was working the MERV. 

Q: Okay, was that shortly after you arrived back or was that later on in the 
day? 

A: That was later on in the day. Then I was on the MERV the next day. I 
believe the next two days. 

Q: Were there people there that you recognized as Fire Department 
personnel, but they weren't in their uniform? 

A: Not that I saw. I saw one guy who used to work here and he was in the 
streets. He used to work with me up at Met. When I was there. I don't know if he's still 
on the job though. But he was in plain clothes. He came up to me and said hey, how are 
you doing? 



Q: What was his name? 

A: I don't know, I left Met six years ago, so I don't know. It was just a very 
frustrating few days. Then to find out on Thursday that I lost so many friends, that's the 
hardest part, just being there and not being able to do anything. I just felt kind of 
helpless. 

Q: Is there anything else you'd like to tell us about this day, the events up 
until about noon? 

A: Until noon we just ran back and forth. We took three patients. Then the 
second trip three. Then we took one. I think we made like 5 or 6 trips to the hospital. 

Q: The next trip you made, do you know how many patients you took? 

A: The second trip? I think it was three, but I know at one point, there was 
one where we took a fireman who was having trouble breathing, he was complaining of a 
little discomfort. But he just kept saying it was just aggita. But we said now is the time 
to take you to the hospital. So we took him to Beth Isreal, as a matter of fact, (inaudible) 

Q: All the trips you made to the hospital, you went to Beth Isreal? You went 
to Bellvue? 

A: We went to Bellvue and Beth Isreal. 

Q: So those were the only two hospitals? 

A: Yeah. 

Q: Okay, after you brought him to Beth Isreal, were you back on the scene 
before noon? Approximately, was it after noon? 

A: I think so, the time was just. . .time didn't count. It was just back and forth 
back and forth. Time didn't mean anything. When we got to Beth Isreal, there was 



someone there hosing down the ambulance because we had about two inches of soot on 
it. The time. . .1 don't know about time, it seemed like everything stopped, you know? It 
was just, I was more or less like a zombie focused on going taking, going taking, going 
taking, and not paying attention to anything else at all. Come to find out later on that I 
had so many friends in there. All these guys dying. . . 

Q: Okay, is there anything else you would like to add to this interview? 

Q: I thank you very much for speaking with me. This interview is concluded 
at 6:37. 



File No. 9110074 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

EMT ADOLPH SMITH 

Interview Date: October 12, 2001 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



A. SMITH 2 

MR. ECCLESTON: Today is October 12th, 
2001. The time is 10:31 hours, and this is 
Christopher Eccleston of the New York City 
Fire Department. I'm conducting an 
interview with the following individual. 

Please state your name and title. 

EMT SMITH: Adolph Smith, EMT. 

MR. ECCLESTON: And your assigned 
command area? 

EMT SMITH: I'm assigned to Battalion 
8. 

MR. ECCLESTON: Of the New York City 
Fire Department? 

EMT SMITH: As a de-con specialist. 

MR. ECCLESTON: Also in the room is -- 

MS. BASTEDENBECK: Chris Bastedenbeck 
from the New York City Fire Department. 
Q. Mr. Smith, were you working on 
September 11th, 2001? 
A. Yes, I was. 

Q. Were you assigned to the World Trade 
Center disaster? 

A. Yes, I was. 

Q. Can you please tell me about the events 



A. SMITH 3 

of that day? 

(Pause. ) 

MR. ECCLESTON: The time is 10:33, and 
we are going to be continuing this 
interview. 

Q. Mr. Smith, can you tell me about the 
events of September 11th? 

A. I was assigned to the World Trade 
Center incident, and we arrived and were directed 
to go to Vesey and West on the west side of West 
Street. We arrived in that area, and I don't 
remember the captain's name. He directed us to 
park along (inaudible). So we did. So we backed 
in to park. 

I just happened to look up, and what I 
thought was debris coming down from the north 
tower was people and bodies. 
(Pause. ) 

MR. ECCLESTON: This interview is being 
concluded at 10:35 hours. Mr. Smith is 
unable to continue with this interview. 



File No. 9110075 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
LIEUTENANT RENE DAVILA 
Interview Date: October 12, 2001 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



R . DAVI LA 2 

MR. ECCLESTON: Today's date is October 
12th, 2001. The time is 1220 hours. This 
is Christopher Eccleston of the Fire 
Department of New York City. I'm conducting 
an interview with the following individual. 
Please state your name, rank, assigned 
command of the Fire Department of the City 
of New York. 

LIEUTENANT DAVILA: Lieutenant Rene 
Davila, shield number 328, lieutenant in 
Battalion 04, Fire Department of New York. 

MR. ECCLESTON: Also present in the 
room is . 

MS. BASTEDENBECK: Christine 
Bastedenbeck of the New York City Fire 
Department . 

Q. Lieutenant Davila, were you assigned 
World Trade disaster on September 11th, 2001? 

A. I was assigned or I put myself on 
assignment immediately after I heard the 
transmission of the plane hitting the tower. 

Q. Can you tell me about the events of 
that day? 

A. Okay. 



R . DAVI LA 3 

Q. Start from the top. 
A. Actually just prior to the plane 
hitting tower one, I was in the office 
communicating with Lieutenant Bill Melarango. I 
just happened to be standing over the desk when I 
heard one of my units, "01 Charlie," put a 
priority message over the frequency stating that 
the plane just hit the tower. Seconds later I 
heard another one of my units, "01 Adam," yelling 
the same thing. 

I immediately put myself on the 
assignment. I ran out, jumped in the vehicle, 
starting responding. When I got over to Rutgers 
and South Street, I was able to see the building. 
I saw a big hole, what appeared to me at that 
time to have been a fire or probably secondary to 
an explosion. I confirmed there was an incident. 
I couldn't confirm it was a plane because I 
didn't see the plane. 

Immediately I confirmed the incident. 
I was over the citywide frequency. Basically I 
started calling for resources. I told them 
immediately to alert the senior staff. I told 
them to get the MERV rolling, start sending all 



R . DAVI LA 4 

available units to that location. Being around 
during the bombing, I basically knew we had an 
incident which was going to generate a great many 
patients . 

I couldn't tell you exactly what floor 
it was. I couldn't tell you how many floors were 
gone but there was a good portion of the building 
that was definitely destroyed. So I knew we had 
some casualties and fatalities. 

Responding now -- what do you want me 
to talk about? Do you want me to talk about 
personal feelings too? 

Q. Sure. Everything. 

A. Well, as far as I feel, a lot of 
personal feelings came. Personally I always 
thought about -- you know you see that guy on 911 
or something like that and he's a hero or 
something and he's a big shot or whatever. I 
know for myself -- I can't speak for somebody 
else -- yeah, I'm going to be like that. Well, I 
was given the opportunity to be that guy, and I 
immediately did not want it. 

As I'm driving, I'm driving and I'm 
also talking on the frequency. But I remember 



R . DAVI LA 5 

that coming through my mind. I also thought of 
Lieutenant Tony Torres, first of all because he's 
from the battalion, second of all because he's 
Hispanic, but next he was the first responding 
supervisor to the bombing at the World Trade 
Center towers . 

Going through all those thoughts and 
stuff also, I started trying to think 
logistically, trying to think of how we were 
taught. Preplans, I don't even know if they 
existed since the merger. However, I still think 
that way. 

So when I traveled down there, I was 
trying to go ahead and get down there where I 
could get down by Vesey Street. Vesey, as far as 
I remember, is the preplan for our staging area. 

I remember I ran down, I came down 
around across by Beekman Hospital and made a 
right over on Beekman Street and went up. I did 
a couple turns across Broadway. I ended up 
coming down Vesey. 

Right over here, right before the union 
is normally where we would have set up staging, 
but it appears when the towers got hit that a lot 



R . DAVI LA 6 

of debris already was in that street and in that 
area. A lot of debris was flying around there, 
and it definitely wasn't, if anything, a safe 
area to set a staging. Plus I noticed that all 
the other apparatus and stuff was still 
continuing on over to West Street. 

So I continued on to West Street, made 
a left-hand turn, and I set the first -- staging 
and command post basically -- you've got West 
Street. I was on the east side of West Street. 
I was setting staging of my units, and I had my 
command right over here, pretty much adjacent to 
the rescue that was running into tower one. 

Q. That's where you parked your vehicle 
then? 

A. That's where I originally parked my 
vehicle . 

Q. Can you just indicate that by a number 
1 on the map? 

A. Trade Center one, Trade Center two. So 
I'll be like number 1. 

Q. So you parked your vehicle there. 

A. Right. 

Q. And you tried to establish a command 



R. DAVILA 7 

post there? 

A. That's what I had given directions. 
Right behind, right on the other side of the 
median there was the bus of 01 Charlie. I 
couldn't see my other unit, 01 Adam, which later 
I found out they were actually on Liberty Street. 

A couple other voluntaries were 
starting to arrive at that time, but I remember 
going over to 1 Charlie because they were my 
unit. I went to the back of the vehicle. They 
had about six -- is my language permissive? 

Q. Whatever you want to say. 

A. This is exactly the way I talk. 

I ran to the back of the vehicle, and I 
said, "What the fuck you got?" No, I saw the 
patient in the back of the vehicle. I saw some 
people with difficulty breathing. Nobody was on 
02. I didn't see no amputation or anything at 
that point. 

I already knew that there was that type 
of patient coming out, because when I first went 
84 on the scene and advised citywide, one or two 
people leaving the tower, I'd seen a couple of 
amputations. I'd seen a couple body parts in the 



R . DAVI LA 8 

street coming towards that location. 

I saw people coming completely burnt at 
me where their clothes were singed off with 
burns, probably from one to fourth degree going 
down into the bone. They were walking to me, and 
I was immediately going, "Walking wounded, you go 
down that way across the street." 

I went in the back of 1 Charlie. I 
said, "Do your patients walk?" He said, "Yeah." 
"Tell them to get the fuck out and run that way." 
At that time I told him to close the door to the 
vehicle and pull every triage tag that they had 
available. I started just yelling at them, 
"Triage, triage, triage." 

Then as the other units were responding 
in, all I was telling them is -- they were 
like -- everybody was trying to run to grab a 
patient. I said absolutely not. I think that 
was one of the most difficult things I had. In 
fact, right now today, I was talking at roll call 
to people about triage and the importance of 
triage. I said, "Triage, triage, triage." 

There were a couple AMR units there. I 
think the next unit I saw was a St. Vincent's 



R . DAVI LA 9 

paramedic unit, and the same thing again. 
They're serious. I don't care. Triage, triage, 
triage . 

At that time I went ahead and I noticed 
already I was losing my voice. I grabbed the 
crew of 1 Charlie. I knew these two guys. I 
told both of them to stick to me like glue. One 
of them was the staging officer. The other one 
had to stay with me because he was going to be my 
voice. Just in case I lost my voice completely, 
at least I was able to talk through him and he 
would have been able to communicate for me. 

The onset from the time I was basically 
trying to grab a hold to try to get an ICS system 
operating. I knew senior staff was responding. 
I have to be honest, when I first got there, the 
first thing I did was get out of my vehicle and 
look to see if I saw another light blue shirt. I 
was hoping somebody else got there before me. 
That's what I was actually hoping. But no, to my 
dismay, there was no one else there. 

Q. Who did you make this staging officer? 
A. The staging officer was EMT Alex 
Loutsky . 



R . DAVI LA 10 

Q. Who was the other -- 

A. As a matter of fact, you'll probably 
see him. He's in the press paper. He's 
downstairs too . 

Q. Who was the person that stayed with 
you? 

A. He was the one that just went out ill, 
secondary probably to this, Ralph Ramos. 

Again just trying to get a hold of the 
whole situation. At that point I remember one 
thing. St. Vincent's unit had some people in 
their vehicle they were going to transport, and I 
said, "You're not going anywhere. You're 
triaging." I knew the importance of triage at 
that time until we got some more resources. 

In between that I'm trying to transmit 
basically what's going on. I can't really 
remember much of my words except basically I was 
given them the access and advising that we have 
clear access to the location from both sides of 
West Street. I knew that was clear on both 
sides, whatever they could get in from that 
location . 

There was debris all in the air, and I 



R . DAVI LA 11 

remember I mentioned at one time this is a hard 
hat operation. 

Then as I'm communicating I catch from 
my peripheral vision on the right -- I didn't 
even think about it hitting the building. I'm 
just basically like what the hell is he doing 
there. Before I knew it, he disappeared behind 
the building, and bingo, there was an explosion. 
I remember yelling over the frequency, however I 
communicated, a secondary explosion in the second 
building. At that time I remember I repeated 
over and over, because I had debris hit my 
helmet, "This is a hard hat situation, a hard hat 
operation, a hard hat operation." 

I looked around me, and everybody like 
maybe stopped for a few seconds like, whoa. I 
can honestly say that it didn't stop the 
operation from moving in the direction that it 
was moving at that particular time. Everybody 
kind of appeared to still continue doing what 
they were doing. The firefighters were still 
loading into the building, except that now 
they're starting to run over to tower two. 

A little while right after that, I 



R. DAVILA 12 

started seeing a couple light blue shirts come 
in. I don't remember the lieutenant's name. 
Lieutenant Mann was one of them from operations I 
remember seeing. Then I saw Lieutenant 
Terranova . 

Q. Ross? 

A. Ross he's here now. And Chief Gombo. 
I came over to Chief Gombo. I still speak about 
this, because the look that he gave me -- he 
looked at me with his mouth open, and I looked at 
him the same way. I handed him my clipboard with 
the units that I had there to start. It was 
basically like the command was turned over with 
very little communication. It was just like this 
is it . 

He knows I knew the area, and he asked 
me what was in the other side of the building. 
I'm like a little rattled. I think Loutsky or 
Ralph, because these guys follow directions, I 
told them to stay with me like glue. Every time 
I turned around, I bumped heads with them. 

They told me Church and Fulton. Church 
and Fulton was told to Chief Gombo. He said, 
"You go ahead and start operations over there and 



R. DAVILA 13 

get the vehicle over there." We sent 1 Charlie, 
in their bus, came back over here, on Vesey going 
over to Church and Fulton right here in front of 
the Millennium. 

Q. Did your vehicle go there also? 

A. Yeah. I got in my vehicle, and I 
started going. However, on the way there a body 
jumps -- well, I think I drove over a couple of 
bodies and stuff like that. 

Another walking body jumped in front of 
my vehicle. That happened to be Captain Stone. 
He was like, "Stop!" He ran from somewhere and 
just -- "Where you going?" I said, "Church and 
Fulton." He said, "I need you to take me here." 
I said, "Chief Gombo told me to go ahead." He 
said, "I told you to fucking take me here." I 
said, "Okay. You're going there. You're going 
there. " 

I put him in the vehicle and brought 
him over to the command post, got my vehicle 
turned back around, and I made it to Church and 
Fulton. 

Q. That's indicated by number 2 on the 
map? 



R . DAVI LA 



14 



A. Right. 

Church and Fulton, I tell you, when we 
first got there, it took longer than it would 
take normally to get there. There were lamp 
posts in the street. There was all kinds of 
metal on the street. There's soot about two feet 
high in different areas throughout the street. 
There's bodies. There's been a couple of bodies 
and people still coming out. 

Of course now we're being approached by 
PD and everything: I have a patient here. I've 
got a patient there. I'm telling them, "I can't 
handle it. Tell them to run and go that way. 
Tell them to go that way." 

What we started doing is right in front 
of the Millennium, started to direct walking 
wounded to go over up Fulton Street, and the ones 
that needed oxygen, things of that nature, we 
were setting up over here in this area. 

Already by that time now I started 
getting more resources. I saw the Cabrini 
paramedics show up. I had a lot of AMR units 
there. Lieutenant 



R . DAVI LA 



15 




Q. 
A. 



|, right. 

Now, you want to hear personal 
feelings? I'll give you personal feelings. You 
know what, she could be a fantastic person, but 
they don't have field experience. I think this 
is very important, because a couple incidents 
happened. 

I went over and I see Loutsky, and I 
walk over. First of all, she was there. She was 
a captain, the highest ranking. But I still felt 
that I was in charge of that operation and I felt 
it calling me to that. 

I had my unit 1 Charlie, and I see 
Alex. By that time we've got AMR, and we're 
loading the AMR buses. They were parked, and 
they were parking all over. There was no 
structure. So what we're doing is we're blocking 
that access and egress out of that location. 
There was no structure. 

The same thing with my voluntary units 
that were coming there. They had 911 training. 
They're able to go ahead and treat the patient 
accordingly. However, no idea of the incident 



R . DAVI LA 16 

command system, staging or about getting in, 
getting out. 

When I started doing AMR, I started to 
tell Loutsky, "Load all the minor injuries and 
stuff in there. Get them and just tell them to 
take the bus over to Brooklyn." I didn't want to 
load the hospitals in Manhattan. Shoot the bus 
over to fucking Brooklyn. Just get them out of 
the way, because they were in the way. That was 
the bottom line. 

But I see Loutsky at one time with a 
clipboard, and he's trying to take names of 
people that are fucking hysterical. I said, 
"What the fuck are you doing?" He said, "The 
captain told me to do tracking and take names . " 
Tracking is fine when you've got 10 patients and 
20 patients and maybe even 50 patients, but I've 
got two fucking 110-story buildings emptying out 
in front of me and I've got a captain telling me 
do tracking. 

So I told him, "Fuck what the captain 
said. I'm in charge, and I'm telling you forget 
about names and forget about fucking numbers . 
Just load them in the bus and get them out of 



R . DAVI LA 



17 




here. " 

If I'm wrong, you write me up, and I'll 
go see your guys in BITS. But you know what? 
Fuck it. I thought that was -- and I told her 
afterwards when we did that interview for Third 
Watch. I made it a little joke. I had to be a 
little respectful, but I had to go ahead and 
explain that. 

The sector was starting to get 
formed -- we had like the sector. I had 
-- again, people from operations 
is a very nice guy. People in operations, 
they're not used to the fucking street or to 
reality. He came in and all of a sudden he 
started talking on the radio. I said, | 
what the fuck you doing talking on the radio?" 
Gombo don't got time to hear that shit. This is 
the big one. We got an assignment. You do the 
assignment. Bottom line, get the patients out. 
Maybe down the line you get calmed down. Then 
you start playing here's the command system. 

Bottom line is you've been trained to 
do this; you go ahead and do it. I'm pissed off 
a little now about it after the fact. Then you 



R . DAVI LA 18 

didn't have the time. It was just like what the 
fuck are you doing? 

So I came out and said, "You want 
command? Here, use my radio. Take command. But 
we need to react. Somebody needs to be the 
treatment officer. You're a medic. I gave you 
the treatment officer." Bottom line, I didn't 
want to go ahead and pull I'm the senior 
lieutenant, whatnot. It wasn't time for that. 

These are some of my feelings, because 
if they're going to do anything about this, 
people need to remember the old way we used to do 
it in EMS that, you know what, the senior 
lieutenant is the one in charge until the next 
person of rank comes in, in that nature. 

The bottom line is get the patients 
out. Triage and get the patients out of the 
goddamn way. That's the bottom way. That's the 
way I was taught. That's the way Chief Goldfarb 
taught me back in the old days. This is the way 
you do MCI, this is the way you do it, get it 
done. Guys like Captain Stern and Jeff 
Armstrong. All these guys, they did MCIs, not 
the playing and fucking around on the radio, 



R . DAVI LA 19 

talking about I've got this and that, because you 
know what? You got thousands of people coming. 

By now I'm watching people jump out of 
windows. It's not like when I saw them jump six, 
seven or eight out of the Shomberg Plaza up in 
Harlem. They were jumping now one, two, three, 
four, smashing like fucking eggs on the ground. 
People were getting hit by bodies falling. 

These guys were talking about write 
down names. I was like, you're fucking out of 
your mind. 

(Interruption. ) 
A. Again, the system was starting to get 
running. I remember Duane Walker. Duane Walker 
is one of the division supply guys. He came and 
brought extra tanks of 02, starting unloading 
those in the sector. I remember asking somebody 
to try to tape off areas over here in front of 
the Millennium, because you had the lobby, you 
had the lobby was here in the corner, and I was 
telling the walking wounded to go that way. 

We had people with all kinds of 
injuries. A lot of the primary injuries that we 
were getting originally was nothing but 



R . DAVI LA 2 

hysterical patients, a lot of hysterical. I 
remember one guy across the street went into a 
grand mal seizure and stuff like that, and they 
pulled me over there. This guy is down and I 
looked. I said, "He's having a seizure. Just 
stay around him and make sure he doesn't get 
hurt. Bye." 

We were starting to get people moving. 
Again, we were using AMR. They had like three or 
four buses there, if I'm correct. I know about 
two of them before the collapse happened I was 
able to get out, load them up and get them out of 
here . 

Now, something that really fucks with 
me a lot is Lillo. Lillo came up to me and said, 
"Lieutenant, my wife is in the building." I'm 
like, "Oh, what are you saying? What are you 
saying?" I don't even know his wife. I knew his 
other wife that worked the same job, but I don't 
know his new lady. "Okay, do me a favor. Help 
me out here and if I see her I'll direct you to 
her. " 

We were just working along. People 
were pulling my coat, "This one is more serious. 



R . DAVI LA 21 

I've got to go." Tag them. We get a bus, we 
throw them in. 

I remember one guy was laying down. He 
had an open chest wound about the size of my fist 
in his right chest. I kept on looking. I knew 
what was coming. I knew he was going to go 
downhill. He had that look in his eye like -- he 
wasn't even talking. He was going into shock. 
All of a sudden you heard the rumble 
and people yelling and screaming. You look and 
you see -- I didn't see the top of the building. 
I didn't see the top of tower two. The collapse 
started. You felt like the ground -- it was like 
a deep sound, rumble; like you're laying on the 
platform and the D train is coming. You look and 
you see what -- I best describe it as a wave 
coming . 

I started running in my direction. I 
started running into the hotel. Something 
knocked me. I don't know whether it was -- 

Q. The Millennium? 

A. We were in front of the Millennium. 
I'm talking going in through the lobby. 

Q. Okay. 



R. DAVILA 22 

A. Something knocked me down. I don't 
know if something hit my helmet or whether it was 
a force. I got down, and I thought I've got to 
get up. By the time I got up, it was like 
[sound] I'm overcome by black and I'm running in 
the building in this black, and I'm running and 
I'm running and I'm running. 

The next thing I know, I see a little 
light, and I follow that light. I run in there, 
and I find I'm in an office, and I close the 
door. I close the door and then I start walking, 
and I'm panicked, I'm panicked. I lost it. I 
lost it for a few minutes in here. 

In this room there's nothing but 
computers, maybe five, six computers, and phones. 
As I'm in there, this force is still coming 
through the cracks of the door. I see some coats 
and I saw a water fountain. So I wet them, and I 
wet them and I stuff them under. I'm like 
walking back and forth, "I'm a medic. I'm a 
medic. I'm not a fucking firefighter. What do 
you do? What do you do? What do you do?" 

I went to one of the computers for a 
minute. I thought I'd go on AOL or something and 



R . DAVI LA 2 3 

call for help. I was like, "What the hell am I 
doing?" I was in a dead end. There was no way 
out of that office. I'm now going, "What the 
fuck did you do? You idiot. You ran out. 
There's no way out. You're going to die in 
here." It was getting real difficult for me to 
breathe in there, the dust, and there was no air 
transmitting across. 

There was a bunch of debris. I tried 
to get out. I said, "I've got to get out of 
here." I've got one of those little super lights 
from Gauls magazine. Better than a mag light. 
It's pretty bright. It wasn't bright enough. 

Could you excuse me a minute? 

MR. ECCLESTON: We'll stop the tape at 
12:47. 

( Pause . ) 

MR. ECCLESTON: We're continuing this 
interview at 12:49. 

A. I was in this office or whatever it 
was. I went ahead -- I opened up the door, and 
some of it -- the noise had settled. However, 
you heard distant sounds. I said let me try to 
get out of here. I opened up. It's pitch-, 



R . DAVI LA 2 4 

pitch-, pitch-black. The only light was inside 
the door. 

I grabbed this mag light, and I said 
maybe if I could make it out through this 
corridor or whatever I walk through I'll hit some 
light and I'll get the hell out of here. I've 
got this light and I'm feeling myself through the 
wall. With the flashlight you could only see 
probably less than a foot. 

I'm feeling. All of a sudden I am 
walking and walking and I find myself inside an 
elevator. That's when I realized this is the 
wrong thing to do, because it could be the 
elevator is not here and I'm going to end up 
falling down the shaft. 

So I tried to get back. It took me a 
while to find myself back. By now I'm really 
gagging for air. I get back in, and I close back 
that door. When I got in there, now it's a 
different feeling. It's a feeling of this is it, 
I bought the bullet, I'm going to die. I have to 
honestly say, all of a sudden from the panic that 
I was at it was just like a warmth. What do you 
do? 



R . DAVI LA 



25 



Actually what I did, I picked up the 
phone, and I got a dial tone. I called my wife. 
She doesn't really work too far. I called her, 
and I'm thinking -- if she answers the phone 
hysterical. I got the secretary or somebody in 
the office, and she was on the phone. She said, 
"I saw it." Her office is up at 250 Church. 
They viewed the whole thing. She knows I work 
this area and the whole nine yards. 

I 'm said, 



You could hear her yelling on the 
other side of the phone with people from 911. 
said, ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^H 



R . DAVI LA 2 6 



I don't know how much time goes by 
between those periods, but there still wasn't the 
second collapse. I come out. I push out some of 
the rubble and stuff like that. I started seeing 
a little light, which turned out to be the lobby. 
I came out in the lobby, and it's destroyed. I 
couldn't go out the way I came in through the 
lobby. I came out through the side door on 
Fulton Street. I'm covered in soot. 

I come out. It was terrible when I got 
there and we set up all of this and how I drove 
there. There were people on the ground. There 
was debris morbidly all over. 

I was devastated. I was like relieved 
that I got out of that building, but I was like 
look at this. The radio was basically quiet 
then. If you heard anything, it was 
point-to-point communications. You heard some 
maydays and you hear people yelling for help, 13. 

I'm like walking like the (inaudible), 
and I met up with this kid Ramos. And we hugged 



R . DAVI LA 2 7 

and we kissed. I told him, "What we can't do 
alone we can do together. We'll get the fuck out 
of here . " 

He goes (inaudible) . I said, "Ramos?" 
He said, "What?" I said, "I left my wallet and 
my refund check in the fucking vehicle. I don't 
think Uncle Sam is going to give me another 
refund check . " 

Q. At this point was your vehicle lost? 

A. Basically all we to do is go around the 
building, came around. But it took longer than 
usual because you're walking in like this shit. 
Like you move and it's this soot like heavy dust. 

While we're walking I realize that we 
only have two people. I see my vehicle. The 
seats are covered. I've still got my bag. I 
hold it like a trophy. Like people collect 
basketballs. I haven't touched -- whatever the 
force was, it was so strong that it went inside 
of the bag. 

But we were there. Vehicle 219 was 
destroyed. 

Q. Was it on fire? 

A. What? 



R . DAVI LA 2 8 

Q. Was it on fire? 

A. Fire? We saw the sucker blow up. We 
heard "Boom!" We were walking up Fulton Street. 
I don't know how far we made it up when someone 
says, "The building's coming down." By the time 
I realized, it's a repeat. 

We were running, and I looked back and 
it seems like the sides of the street were 
getting narrower. The sound got louder and the 
wave. I remember we separated one time and Ramos 
wanted to go down into the train station. I 
said, "No fucking way. We're out here. Without 
ventilation, we're definitely dead." I said, "If 
I'm going to die, I'm going to die with a 
fighting chance." 

We held hands, and we were running. 
The next thing we know, [sound] . When it covers 
you, it's silent. Ramos was just a little 
slightly like (inaudible) . I couldn't see him. 
I tell him -- I always have a handkerchief; it's 
an old Spanish thing. I had my handkerchief, and 
I wrapped it around. I told Ramos the same 
thing. I said, "Wrap something around your 
mouth. Keep the soot and stuff out and just 



R . DAVI LA 2 9 

breathe shallow. Just take enough oxygen, 
because you don't want to breathe all this dust." 

If anything that was comical, the human 
body -- or maybe I'm just a fucking nut. Things 
that happened, because we're walking and Ramos 
says, "Lieutenant." I'm like, "What the fuck you 
want?" You could hear each other and that's it. 
He said, "I lost my radio." We're dying. We're 
going to die. This guy is telling me he lost his 
fucking radio. I said, "Remind me if we make it 
through this, and I'll fucking write you up." 

The next thing you hear (knock), my 
helmet hits -- I still don't know what it is. 
I'm assuming it was a lamppost or something. 
That's when I told Ramos this is not going to 
work, we're not going to make it. We decided we 
were holding on together. We held together, 
baby. 

We moved over to the right, and we felt 
along through the buildings . Along through the 
building, all the businesses must have been 
locked up after the first impact, because all the 
businesses were closed. We're walking and 
walking . 



R . DAVI LA 3 

I happened to catch a little light. 
There was a glass in a cleaner. I'm banging, 
"Open the fuck up or I'm kicking this shit in." 
Nobody wanted it kicked in because all that shit 
will come in. They opened up. We ran in. We 
came in there -- what turned out to be a Subway 
store . 

There were a bunch of people in there. 
I was happy to see them; they were happy to see 
us. I have to honestly say that thank God for 
those people and the situation I thought of, 
because they were looking at us because we were 
in uniform. "Us" is me and Ramos. Ramos is 
looking at me because I'm the lieutenant. So 
that took away the panic from me, and reliving 
this it's, okay, I'm Lieutenant Davila, I've got 
to be a leader. 

So I remember -- I go and I yell out, 
"Who's the boss?" An oriental guy raises his 
hand. I said, "Well, by order of the City of New 
York, I'm the boss now. Go in your register, get 
your money, put it in your pocket." Then I told 
everybody step back, and I told anybody who tried 
to open up the door I was going to kick their 



R . DAVI LA 



31 



ass. I got everybody to the back of the store. 

I remember I told the man -- there was 
two guys that were willing to help. I said, 
"Just get some stuff, stuff it under the door and 
try to keep as much debris, or whatever, coming 
in. " 

I didn't know what was going on. I 
know the first building fell and there was shit 
all over, and I know the second one fell and we 
were closer to it. I have to honestly say after 
the first plane hit, I thought there was a chance 
of me dying. After that first collapse and I was 
in that building, I thought I was dead. I made 
it through that and I'm like, oh, fuck. 

I tell you, the feelings, again, that 
I've had, you know what, false pride is 
unbelievable, things that we have to go through, 



|This is what I'm thinking about. But 
I was thinking of myself as a corpse already. 
Lieutenant Davila died in the line of duty. 



R. DAVILA 32 

I kept these people in the back. 
They're all hysterical. I'm like, "Shut up. 
Stop it. You can't control this. Let's try to 
make it together. Save the oxygen." I was 
telling them, "Nobody move without me knowing 
where you're going." 

You know what was the funniest thing? 
I ended up taking off my turnout coat. I took it 
and I threw it over the counter. The Chinese guy 
came and took my turnout coat and pulled it on 
the floor. I'm like, "What the fuck you doing?" 
He said, "Food, food." I'm like, "Fucking food, 
there's soot all over this shit." Now I'm mad. 
I took my fucking thing and I put it back over 
it. "Fuck you, you jerk." 



|. made open up 
the refrigerator, get bottles of water, give it 
to the people to drink. 

We were in there for a while. The time 
period that we were in there I really don't know. 
I would probably say maybe 20 minutes or so like 



R. DAVILA 33 

that. Then all of a sudden we start seeing the 
lights start flickering. 

So what I did was I told them to open 
up the door and I came out. I came out just to 
look and see what's going on there. I started 
seeing some people up in the corner. It was much 
clearer. I guess that's where the avenue opened 
up, West Broadway, where it was opening up. I 
think Chase Manhattan Bank is over here. 

So what I did was I came back in there. 
I saw a couple ambulances and stuff. I asked the 
Oriental guy, "Do you have any towels?" He said, 
"Yeah." I said, "Everybody grab a towel. Wrap 
it around your face." I had everybody holding 
hands. I had about 18, 20 people in there. I 
had everybody hold hands, and I just had them go 
out the side of the building and just head east. 

We came up here, and it was me and 
Ramos. We came out to sunlight, I saw Bruce 
Medjuck there. I think I saw Pat Scaringello. 
Then we started hearing the radio: "Stage in 
Battery Park or Chambers and West." It would be 
just sounds and it was horrible. It sounded 
horrible. I really thought that we had -- EMS 



R . DAVI LA 



34 



would have a lot more casualties than what it 
was, because I didn't see them. The thought was 
devastating . 

Then, I forgot, Amy Monroe showed up at 
the areaj 

Bill Melarango. These people need 
to be commended. We came in and had to be there. 
Bill was a station boss. She was out on leave of 
absence. Then she shows up in a crisp white 
uniform. 

When I got up there, my concern was for 
Bill, Amy and Alex. 



But me and Ramos went nuts going 
looking for them. Walking back over there, we 
found Alex. He's okay. We never found Amy. We 
never found Bill. We went back there looking for 
them and looking for them and couldn't find them. 
We thought maybe we lost them. 

So again it was me and Ramos . You 
know, I go to the right guy. I said, well, okay, 
we've got to regroup. I hear this going on -- 
and we begin walking. We walked down to Beekman. 



R. DAVILA 35 

Beekman was set up pretty nicely. We waited for 
patients and stuff like that. There were a 
couple of patients, but not what they were 
preparing for. That was really like -- I started 
thinking, we ain't getting the numbers. 

The force of this was so great that 
there was debris and soot all the way down past 
South Street. 

So I had to do something. We're there. 
I called it war then. It's really war now. I 
said, like, okay, I've got to deal with this. 
What will you do? What am I going to do? I 
started meeting a couple of people straggling 
out, some of St. Vincent's units. I'm going, 
okay, I'm the only one here with any authority. 

So they were helping out at the 
hospital, and I told them to continue. I asked 
them what they were doing. They just brought a 
couple patients there. Then one or two of them, 
their partners were missing, so they were just 
cross-eyed. I got them in the room, calmed them 
down, take it easy. 

I found this guy Duane Walker, the 
equipment guy, here. Basically I'm like, "Come 



R . DAVI LA 3 6 

on, fellows." I got Lawrence from 
communications. I don't know how he ended up 
getting them. He ended up there with civilian 
clothes and a shield. I said, "You're going to 
stay with us too." 

Q. Do you know what his last name is? 

A. No. I know he's an EMT for -- he works 
for communications. (Inaudible) . He was there. 
Ashby, you know about Ashby; right? 

Q. Yes. 

A. I found out that there was -- I forgot 
the name of the place now. I go there all the 
time. But right down Fulton Street -- okay, this 
is further down. Down by Beekman, down by Fulton 
and Pearl there's a nursing facility, and they 
work in conjunction with New York Downtown. I 
heard they were starting a triage and the 
treatment center over there. 

I took a walk down there to see how 
they were doing. I spoke to one of the doctors 
over there. Basically what the doctor at that 
time told me was that they needed some saline and 
tubing for eye washing stuff. 

So I walked back to hospital 01. I 



R. DAVILA 37 

wasn't going to bring that equipment back over 
there, because I knew I had to get back to an EMS 
command. I had to make a decision, I was going 
to the Battery or I'm going to West and Chambers. 
So I told them and I got the Cabrini people to go 
ahead and bring them their supplies. I did that. 

Finally I was trying to decide which 
way I'm going to go, and my decision was I'm 
going to West and Chambers . My real reason for 
going to West and Chambers is because I knew my 
wife was on Church, and in walking I had to go by 
there, it's just a block by. I actually went by 
and said I'm here, I'm alive. 

Then I left and headed to the command 
post at West and Chambers. Everything down there 
was pretty calm. Actually it took a little while 
to get to West and Chambers and stuff like that 
still. You're meeting up with people. I found 
out they had a little staging area already. 
That's where I met up with Captain Parra. 

MR. ECCLESTON: Rene Davila on October 
12th, 2001, continuation on side two. 
A. Actually prior to meeting up with Parra 
on Greenwich, after we started crossing Church 



R . DAVI LA 



the other way, I ended up meeting academy 
personnel. I met up with a bunch of people from 
the academy. Captain Gio Pineda was there with a 
couple other people. 

I guess I must have been rowdy because 
they came both to me and Ramos and looked at us 
and said, "Come on, get in the bus, I'm not going 
on no bus. I've got to go work and everything 
else. " 

Then the news media started. They 
found out that I was there, that I was in the 
Marriott and the first boss there. And Travis 
was there. Not the captain, the lieutenant. 
Q. Barry Travis? 

A. Yeah. And Maggiure -- the news media 
-- that's okay -- I walked away from them. 
That's when everyone went by and I saw Fern and I 
started heading towards West and Chambers and | 



R . DAVI LA 3 9 



I made it back to West and Chambers. 
That was a good sight. It was a good sight to 
see all the firefighters and all the firemen and 
seeing buses from like counties I never heard of. 
It must have been a couple hours already that 
passed by. 

Then I made it to Stuyvesant School. 
Again, I'm not -- me and Ramos stuck together. I 
went there and I said I'm not staying and sitting 
in an auditorium. Then I was looking for 



R . DAVI LA 



40 



something to do. I know I was part of it and I 
wanted to do more. I saw the itch in these poor 
kids that got there, and they wanted to do 
something. They were keeping them locked in -- 
you know why they should have had them standing 
outside. They were dying. 

I remember I made it back out to the 
street and stuff again, and Chief McCracken came 
up to me. Chief McCracken saw me, and he said, 
"I thought you were dead. It's good to see you." 
That was it. We talked. We did it facing 
everybody hanging out there. That's all there 



I'm still looking for Amy and Bill. I 
finally started -- somebody told me that Amy was 
at the hospital. I'll tell you a story about 
that. I don't care how unofficial that is, I 
(inaudible) on that one. Somebody saw Bill, so I 
felt a lot better. 

Everybody took to their high horse and 
shit. I have to say that when I got to the 
command, I see Kowalczyk and everybody looked 
like they're gummy bears, full of dust, and he 
was in his crisp white shirt. 



R . DAVI LA 41 



Then I saw Stone coming in, and he 
said, "Rene, what are you doing? I want 
clipboards and paper pads." I'm like, "You're 
fucking serious? You want clipboards? I'll get 
you fucking clipboards. I went to Stuyvesant 
High School. I'm Puerto Rican. I'm pretty good 
at something . " 

I found my way to an office, and I 
start opening drawers. The secretary's always 
got a stash. We open drawers and find a bunch of 
pads . I got him a pad, I got him a fucking 
pencil sharpener, I got him a fucking ruler, I 
got him clipboards, I got him everything out of 
there and said, "Here, mother fucker." 

I think McCracken just noticed that I 
was fucking wild. He ordered me, "I want you to 
sit down. You're upset." "No." "That's it. 
Sit down. " 

That was it. That was basically where 
I ended up, me and Ramos. Then all of a sudden 
Ramos kind of collapsed on me, so I got a bus for 
Ramos. We were married then. He was going to 



R. DAVILA 42 

hospital 01. I'm going to hospital 01 with him. 
I don't know about what time. I guess it was 
about 8:30, 9:00 at night. 

We get him on a stretcher and into 
hospital 01. The nurses saw me there, and they 
grabbed me. I kind of buckled at the knees. 
They treated me like (inaudible) . I still 
couldn't stand still. I was like, "Get this shit 
off me. " 

That's basically my part. That's how 
my day went. I finally got out of here probably 
around midnight or so, and I was back up at 4:30 
in the morning. I was back here at 6:00 again. 



That's it. 
Q. Is there anything else you would like 
to add? Any other feelings or anything? 



R . DAVI LA 4 3 



On the EMS side of this, that I'm aware 
of, there's only two fatalities. 



R . DAVI LA 



45 



R . DAVI LA 4 6 



R . DAVI LA 



47 



I saw people die. I saw people jump 
out of windows, more than I've ever seen in my 



R . DAVI LA 4 8 

life. Let me tell you something else. I'm 51 
fucking years old. I've seen just about fucking 
everything and I've done a lot more. And you 
think about it. We have been able to keep 
ourselves intact. 



R . DAVI LA 



49 



|l'm glad to see my bosses there. I'm 
glad to have seen McCracken there. I thank them. 
And Gombo, who I heard almost died in this. 

I'm glad to see these guys. I was glad 
to hear Goldfarb on the radio, Mr. MCI. It was 
like, okay, here we go. 



Q. You've got a lot to be proud of. 
A. EMS didn't do things that bad. 



R . DAVI LA 



50 



Let me shut up. Thank you. 
Q. Thank you today for conducting this 
interview with us . 

MR. ECCLESTON: This interview is being 
concluded at 128 hours. The counter on the 
cassette player is 892 /-FPLT 



File No. 9110076 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMS CAPTAIN MARK STONE 
Interview Date: October 12, 2001 



Transcribed by Elisabeth F. Nason 



M. STONE 

MS. BASTEDENBECK: Today's date is October 
12, 2001. The time now is 850 hours. I'm at 
Battalion 8. My name is Christine Bastedenbeck of 
the New York City Fire Department. I'm conducting 
an interview with the following individual. 
Q. Please state your name rank, title and 
assignment . 

A. Mark Stone, Captain, Commanding Officer, EMS, 
Battalion 8. Day of incident, unit DC 01. 

Q. Also present at this interview is -- 
A. Christopher Eccleston of the New York City 
Fire Department, World Trade Center Task Force. 

Q. Captain Stone, I would like you to tell us 
about the events of the morning of September 11, 2001. 

A. Well, just before the incident was 
transmitted, we were preparing to move the station into 
our new trailers, because they were going to destroy 
our old station. We were at the trailers when the MERV 
operator, who was with me, informed me of the 
incident. He said that a plane hit the World Trade 
Center . 

Q. Can you just tell me the MERV's operator's 
name? 

A. That was Rick Perez. So I was with a member 



M. STONE 

of executive administration, Mr. Dave Harney, and all 
of my equipment would have been located at Division 1 
down on pier 36. I asked Dave if he could give me a 
ride down there. His vehicle doesn't have any lights 
or sirens, it's a regular sedan, so we jumped in the 
car and we took off. We were heading down the FDR 
Drive and listening to it and it seemed pretty chaotic 
already, the Lieutenant giving his first report, that 
he wasn't even on the scene, that he saw heavy smoke 
from the Trade Center. 

At one point the Trade Center became visible 
to me. My first thought was oh, my god, a plane really 
hit the World Trade Center. I used my cellphone and I 
called RCC to make sure I was logged onto show me a 
route to the Trade Center. I called the Division to 
have my aide for the day-to-day, Gregg Brady, get the 
truck ready, make sure he had all my equipment so that 
we were set to go when I got there. 

It was interesting later on I don't even know 
why. I ran upstairs and I grabbed extra cell phone 
batteries, which I never do. It was pretty 
interesting. We got in the truck, listening to reports 
coming in on Citywide and we ended up taking the 
Battery Park Tunnel underneath to come up on the West 



M. STONE 

Street side of the incident. We came up right out of 
the tunnel. I was looking up to see if I could do a 
little more initial size up. That is when I saw the 
second plane hit the building. I just watched it 
coming in. 

I see that the plane hit and I'm really 
thinking for the safety of the members that we got 
operating already, Lieutenant D'Avila did a great job. 
He notified everybody it was a hard hat operation and 
he started setting up the incident command system for 
this event, which later on just had to be reworked many 
times . 

Everything was completely grid locked at the 
mouth of the Battery Tunnel, so I had to get out of the 
truck at that point. I told my aide when you free it 
up, park the vehicle and meet me at the command post. 
I actually walked up from the Battery Tunnel and when 
I'm walking up, I'm trying to watch what's going on, 
get a good picture of the area. 

Some people, instead of walking along 
buildings, were in the middle of the street. I 
directed them to the side. The cops were doing a good 
job. It was pretty good evacuation going on at that 
moment. Orderly, there weren't many people who were 



M. STONE 

hysterical. No patients were presenting themselves 
south, so things were really moving along. 

I got up to the front of the building and 
took a better look. I heard Lieutenant D'Avila was on 
the opposite side. 

Q. Which building was that? 
A. I was approaching number 1 World Trade 
Center, because that's where I knew he was, on the 
other side towards Vesey from listening to the radio. 
I was approaching number 1 World Trade Center, because 
I was going go into the lobby of the building where the 
command post was being set up. 

I knew there were other officers coming in 
and there were many senior officers coming in. I 
wanted to see what I was going to be confronted with 
before I predetermined in my mind that I would be 
taking command of the incident. 

I'm looking along the buildings and naturally 
glass and debris is flying from the building, but it 
was really clear that if you walked along the side of 
the building, you were fine getting in. There weren't 
-- naturally everything is a safety issue at that 
point, but it was really clear going in. If you stayed 
along the side of the building, you would be okay, 



M. STONE 

because everything was falling out more into the 
street . 

I made it into the lobby at the command post 
and Chief Gombo was just arrived as well. We met 
together really quick and we determined that we would 
need a few ambulance crews inside and we would start 
setting up a triage area in the lobby of the building. 
He asked me to identify a place really quick. There 
was an area that was set off that wasn't being handled 
by the command post. It was really at the time we 
thought a safe location. Who was to know what would 
happen later. 

We went back out and, myself and my aide, 
Gregg Brady, we identified three crews, two BLS and an 
ALS crew. I remember specifically that I took 9 
Charlie, 7 Nora and 11 x-ray. Thank god that all those 
guys made it out alive. 

Q. Do you remember who the personnel on those 
units were? 

A. I remember that 9 Charlie or 7 Nora. They 
are both St. Claire's units and 11 x-ray is a Lenox 
Hill unit. I made sure everybody had helmets because I 
wouldn't take anybody without one. They did said they 
did. I know from working with these guys in the field 



M. STONE 

that they are all working crews, that I took some good 
crews with us . 

I went back into the lobby of the building 
and my aide was behind me and he came up to me and he 
said Cap, they are concerned about coming into the 
building. I told him, I said, at this point, you know, 
orders only go so far. I told him go back. If they 
don't want to come into the building, if they have any 
hesitation, go get me three crews that will come into 
the building. It's sort of fruitless to start ordering 
people at that point. 

We just find the volunteers that we can and 
it turns out they all came in. We had the crews and 
then in speaking to Chief Gombo, I don't know how he 
came up with it, but he said go scout out 7 World Trade 
Center for me over by OEM. They want to set up a 
triage over there. 

Rather than go back out through the 
buildings, which I knew what we were facing safety 
wise, we went through the complex and we came out on 
Vesey Street right opposite 7 World Trade Center. We 
made it into the lobby. There was no problem at that 
point. We found out that 7 World Trade Center houses 
OEM and Secret Service and a bunch of other agencies, 



M. STONE 

but they were all evacuated at that point. 

They shut down the command center and they 
were evacuating OEM. Everybody felt it was pretty safe 
to be in the lobby of the building. At that time I met 
Chief Peruggia, Captain Abdo Nahmod, and Richard 
Zarrillo, who is the special events coordinator for 
Chief Peruggia. I spoke with Chief Peruggia real quick 
and I left the crews with him and he told me to go 
report back to Chief Gombo. 

The interesting thing to that is when I 
talked to John later on, a couple days later, if I 
would have stayed one second later and talked to him 
another second, I would have been in the lobby when the 
building collapsed. Or if I would have left him a 
second earlier, I would have been standing next to 
Chief Ganci when the building collapsed. There is a 
whole bunch of fate going on here. 

I went back through the lobby of the building 
and we were met with a Secret Service agent who was 
just physically exhausted from running up the 
buildings. I told him now is not the time to be 
exhausted because he thought that he was going to be a 
patient. I told him if you can evacuate yourself, 
evacuate yourself. Everybody was out of the building. 



M. STONE 

I made sure there was nobody from EMS still in the 
lobby because we were moving our entire operation. I 
was the last one out of 1 World Trade Center. 

I made it about halfway across West Street 
and I was just stepping into the street off the center 
median when I heard what is going to be instilled in my 
memory forever; a sound that combines a railroad car, 
an airplane, a fighter jet and thunder. I looked up 
and I saw the World Trade Center falling down. Number 
1 World Trade Center was coming down. Number 2, I 
couldn't even really be sure at that point. One of the 
buildings was falling on my head. I said oh, my god. 
You really only had a split second to make a decision. 
I could have ran left, I could have ran right, which 
would have been north or south on West Street, but I 
looked right in front of me and I was looking at the 
command post where I saw all the senior Chiefs. I saw 
Chief Kowalczyk. I saw Chief Gombo and there was, in 
the American Express building, in the World Financial 
Center, there was actually an underground garage and I 
don't know why I chose that garage, but I chose to run 
straight ahead for the garage. I must have made it in 

-- I don't know whether I was in 10, 20, 30, 50, 100 
feet. I know I wasn't in far, but all of a sudden just 



10 
M. STONE 



a woosh and a thrush, just, I started getting hit by 
debris. I got picked up and started being thrown. We 
were tripping over each other; firemen, Chiefs, 
Captains, Lieutenants, EMTs . I don't know if there 
were any EMTs, I should not say that. 

We just got thrown, and everything went black 
and it was almost silent. Right at that moment I saw 
my two kids. I saw my father who passed away. I was 
actually in the air flying along and it was only, I 
guess, maybe a second, and I said to myself my god, 
that's it, it's over, because it was black and it was 
silent . 

Then I hit the ground. Then stuff was just 
piling on top of me. As soon as I hit, I fell on my 
shoulder. I got an excruciating pain. So I said to 
myself -- this is all within a second this is going on 
through my mind. I said to myself, I said, you are not 
dead because there is no pain in heaven. I feel this 
excruciating pain running down my arm. Now I'm getting 
hit in the back of my head and everything and thank god 
I had my helmet on. 

Another interesting thing was that I wore my 
turnout coat that day. I don't wear my turnout coat 
too often. Forever I will wear my turnout coat every 



11 

M. STONE 



day. I wore my turnout coat, so everything was just 
hitting me in the back. I said all right I'm not dead, 
because I'm not in heaven. Then I said wait a second. 
Maybe I'm in hell. Right at that moment I just decided 
there's no way I'm staying in hell. I don't belong 
here. I just stayed down for a another few seconds. I 
know that was a conscious decision I made just to stay 
down and try and let things subside a little bit. 

It was still pitch black. Dust was flying. 
I couldn't breathe at that point. I couldn't see 
anything. I couldn't hear anybody else around me, so 
I'm just assuming that there really is nobody else 
around me, that, you know, the worst has come. I 
didn't want to come to that realization yet. While I'm 
thinking it, I didn't want to believe it. 

I waited another few seconds and then I -- it 
was sort of like it subsided a little bit, because I 
didn't hear any more rumble, but it was still quiet. I 
managed to get up, clean some stuff off me and start 
figuring that I had to search my way out of here. I 
think of a few things really quick. Back to years and 
years and years ago when I went to basic fire training 
in Suffolk County Fire Academy, I said you know what I 
got to do. The first thing I got to do is I got to 



12 
M. STONE 



breathe, otherwise I will be dead in no time. So I 
actually took my head and I took my turnout coat and I 
disengaged. I pulled the snaps off and I disengaged my 
liner and everybody always made fun of me because I 
always left my full liner in the coat even in the 
summer. I disengaged the liner and I actually used 
that to shield me to breathe. Probably one of the two 
things that saved my life. 

The other was after we started going I 
remembered that coming from SOD, you always had Nomex 
hoods, because when we suited up we had to wear hoods. 
I said, well, I got my hood in my pocket. I pulled my 
hood out and I used that also. So I had at that point, 
which was a double filter, to allow me to breathe. So 
it had to be like -- I'm estimating, probably another 
10 minutes, that I couldn't find anybody. I was just 
-- I guess sort of just wandering around in there, 
just trying to find my way out. 

Then I saw a light and it was a fireman. He 
was calling out to people. I said yes, I'm over here. 
Now it's just the two of us. We started moving down. 
We made a pact that we were both getting out of there 
alive. I don't know who this guy was. I believe that 
he saved my life, because without that light, without 



13 
M. STONE 



the two of us reassuring each other, I'm not quite sure 
I would have made it out of there. I would love to 
know who he was. The two of us together, we said we 
stay together no matter what happens. 

Another few minutes later we found another 
firefighter, another firefighter. Nobody was injured. 
My shoulder wasn't really a concern at that point. I 
had sprained my knee, I had hurt my shoulder, but that 
wasn't like a concern. We found a few more guys. I 
don't know how long it was. It was a while, but 
everything was still pitch black. Nobody could breathe 
down there. A few firefighters had masks. They were 
passing them off to help some people out. Some firemen 
didn't have masks. There was a real spirit of -- this 
was at the time like 5 or 6 guys, that we were just 
fighting for our lives . 

I don't know, it could have been two minutes, 
it could have been two hours. It could have been 20 
minutes. Best guess that I can imagine was like 20 
minutes. We searched our way and we had an orderly 
search that we all just held on to each other and we 
found a wall and we essentially just searched our way 
out of the building. 

These guys, everybody just sort of fell back 



14 
M. STONE 



to training that they had learned over the years and 
you know, that's how we searched our way out of there. 
We found a stairwell and then we found a whole bunch of 
more firefighters. I guess it was about 20 of us then. 
Q. The stairwell, was this lit and everything? 
A. Yes, actually that was the only thing that 
was lit, which was pretty strange. I imagine from the 
emergency lighting. So we walked up and the door -- I 
think they said it had to be forced. I wasn't sure, 
because we were in the stairwell for a minute. We were 
talking to each other and we said, you all right, you 
all right, you all right. 

We made it out of the stairwell. It led us 
right out, I want to say that we were -- we actually 
came out the back of the Financial Center, because I 
was looking at the Hudson at that point. That's where 
we walked, just right to the water, which wasn't far. 

At that point I said out loud, I said, okay, 
let me get my thoughts together. We got to go back to 
work. One of the firemen looked at me and he said are 
you stupid. I said yes. In this case I must be. I 
remembered clearly at that point -- I mean some people 
were jumping on boats at that point, because there were 
boats lined up along the Hudson. People were just 



15 
M. STONE 



jumping on boats and I thought of doing that at a 
point . 

But I remember specifically that I remembered 
Chief Kowalczyk, that I left -- that he was the last 
person that I really physically saw. I ended up making 
my way back to Vesey Street. I was actually over at 
West End Avenue. Is that West End? 
Q. North End? 

A. North End, right. I was at North End Avenue 
and Vesey Street, where I met with Chief Goldfarb. At 
that point we didn't know really what the outcome of 
this whole thing was going to be, but we decided real 
quick that we needed to put together a plan because 
there is still a monumental incident ahead of us. I 
was just trying to keep my composure at that point, 
because I still had a job to do. Being a Captain, 
there are still many people that are under me who are 
going to look to me for guidance and support. There is 
also Chiefs that really need me to function. 

So I took a few seconds, I took a few deep 
breaths and I told Chief Goldfarb that I remember 
leaving Chief Kowalczyk and I need to go back and find 
him, because we still haven't seen him. Again the time 
frame wasn't much after the building collapsed. Still 



16 
M. STONE 



I don't even remember which one collapsed first. I'm 
sort of, I guess to this point, one and two was 
immaterial. It was one of the towers. I believe it 
was two that came down first, because right after that, 
I told Chief Goldfarb, I am going back to find Chief 
Kowalczyk. I know where I left him. I know where he 
should have been, because we still haven't seen him. 
We haven't heard from him. 

At that point my aide, who I'm thinking all 
along, because he was behind me, collapsed and I didn't 
know. I just assumed that he was dead. That -- you 
know, now I am by myself. He popped up and then there 
was a quick moment of embrace, hugging and again 
praying to god at that point. Like someone said, there 
were no atheists down at Ground Zero. 

I said okay. Now we are going to go find 
Chief Kowalczyk. We went back around and I was 
standing in the corner of West Street and Vesey Street 
where I met Chief Basile, Chief Cassano, Chief Hayden, 
Chief Pfeifer, Chief Pfeifer from the first, Chief 
Hayden, Fire Division 1 commander, Chief Basile, EMS 
Division 2 commander. Chief Cassano at the time was 
the Citywide Tour Commander. We were briefly speaking 
for a second. 



17 
M. STONE 



We were standing in the corner of West Street 
and Vesey Street, and I heard that rumble again, that 
roar, that thunder, and I said dear god, I almost died 
once. God can't be letting this happen to me again. I 
looked up. This is how I know 2 fell first. I looked 
up and it was happening again. 1 World Trade Center 
was falling on my head now. 

I said holy cow, this really can't be 
happening. Again you have that decision, do I run 
north on West Street or do I run to the water. I said 
screw this, I'm just -- I'm going for a swim in the 
Hudson. That's where I'm going to run. It hit this 
time, but the difference was when it hit was because we 
were outside, it was just a deep dark gray rather than 
pitch black. Things were hitting us, but it was more 
dust, just more of the construction dust at this 
point . 

I was still running but I couldn't see and we 
were tripping and while we were running, I thought I 
lost Chief Basile this time because we were running 
side by side. I later found out that he actually 
ducked into a doorway, but I just kept running until I 
hit North End Avenue again and then all I did was I 
just took a sharp right and it all just sort of just 



M. STONE 

passed me. I was standing there almost in the clear. 
Everything was much thinner, the dust and you could 
breathe over there. 

We were sort of safe at that point. That's 
when Chief Kowalczyk emerged. He had come around from 
the other side. Chief Gombo was there. Chief Basile 
was there. We found out that he ducked into the 
doorway. We were all sort of reassembling then. We 
were going to start moving up to Stuyvesant High 
School, and I said to him, I said I don't think that's 
far enough north for us. I said we really need to move 
this thing north. 

We all just kicked around where we were going 
to go. I said why don't we just go up to the piers. 
It's wide open, and Chief Gombo agreed that that would 
be a good plan, that we could start reassembling up 
there and try to figure out who was dead or alive, 
because we knew there were going to be numerous deaths 
at that point. 

You are running into so many people during 
the time through the whole thing. I mean I can't even 
really remember how many people I saw. At that point 
we started -- the MERV was over at North End Avenue and 
Vesey. I don't even remember the building number. I 



19 
M. STONE 



think it was a hotel actually. We started putting 
together a triage area over there and we ended up 
moving it. MERV relocated. 

I walked up towards Murray Street and then I 
walked up to the West Side Highway and I just turned 
around and looked back at the Trade Center and I said 
oh, my god, because I'm sure that everybody has heard a 
million times, whoever in their right mind would have 
thought that the World Trade Center would ever fall 
down . 

I was at the first one, the first incident in 
'93. I think we were all lulled into really a false 
sense of security that they couldn't take it down with 
a bomb, that this would never happen. A lot of emotion 
hit me at that point. I saw Rabbi Birnhack at that 
point. He said a prayer for me. 

I started walking north on West Street. I 
didn't know how far I was going to go, but I was -- I 
just didn't know what I was going to do at that point. 
I didn't know what my thoughts were. I was just sort of 
in a daze. Two 110 story buildings fell on my head so 
to speak. I was trapped before. I don't like using 
the word trapped because the fallen firefighters, 
police officers, they are trapped, and they are dead. 



20 



M. STONE 



That's not a good word. I was just entangled for a 
little while. Then I was able to thank god extricate 
myself from, you know. I mean I lost a lot of friends, 
a lot of people I worked with over the years, coming 
from SOD. I worked with a lot of guys in specialty 
units. Being in Manhattan I worked with a lot of 
guys. The names of -- you work with all the Battalion 
Chiefs and all the first line Battalion Chiefs who got 
killed. Terry Hatton, from Rescue 1 who I know for 
many years, he got killed. There were many other guys, 
Dennis Mojica, all the rest from Rescue 1 who we deal 
with on a regular basis, because being a Captain, a lot 
of first line supervisors deal with Engine companies, 
but I knew these guys. I know a lot of these guys. 
Couple of guys I grew up with. 

One happens to be a police officer, Joe 
Viggiano, who was in truck 2. His brother John 
Viggiano was a Firefighter in Ladder 132. They are 
both still missing. Just a tremendous amount of people 
that I would find out about later. 



) 



I was with my aide Gregg. We were just 



21 
M. STONE 



walking north. He says what are we going to do. I 
said I don't know, just give me a few minutes. I got 
to get a few minutes. I just got to put this together 
in my head. 

Then I met with Chief Hirth, who is Division 
1 commander and Grace Cacciola, Lieutenant in the 
Division, were in the Academy or so I thought, in 
refresher. Right at that moment they appeared. I just 
grabbed Grace and I hugged him. We both cried. I 
didn't know they were there, they thought I was dead. 
Because just my personality and where I have been in 
SOD, they assumed that I was in the building. The only 
reason I got out was God has determined that it's not 
my time yet . 

We just held onto each other for a few 
minutes. Then we said okay. What are we going to do. 
It was time to head up to the piers. We started 
regrouping. We head up to the piers and they started 
putting things together. At that point I was pretty 
well limping because my knee was hurting me and my 
shoulder. I was still in a lot of pain. So Chief 
Hirth actually ended up driving me in a command car. 
We had a command car. He drove me over to Bellevue 
Hospital where I was evaluated. We found out nothing 



22 
M. STONE 



was broken. It was some just sprains and stuff. They 
took a chest x-ray because I must have eaten 50 or a 
hundred pounds of construction dust, asbestos, and 
everything else that was in the air that day. 

They said -- Bellevue signed me off from 
work. I said that's great, but there is still a 
monumental job to do. I mean we weren't even close to 
getting a hand on anything at that point. So I took a 
few minutes. I washed my face. I cleaned myself up. 
I put my turnout coat and helmet on. Back to the Trade 
Center I went. 

That was pretty much the morning. I was 
there probably until 4:30, quarter to 5 the next 
morning, at which time I was released. That's the 
morning of September 11. Ironically, that's my 
sister's birthday. She is a police officer. She was 
off that day, thank God. Her birthday is never going 
to be the same, which is just -- we are two years and 
51 weeks apart. My birthday is a week later and it was 
a big thing. 

I got home that morning and after I got on to 
West Street, early, before we walked down to Chelsea 
and I went to the hospital, a few interesting things 
happened. Everything happens for a reason, fate. My 



23 
M. STONE 



wife, who is a Lieutenant on our job, she is EMS 
Lieutenant, she knew that I was there. Right after the 
first building collapsed, I picked up my cell phone 
along with that 450 trillion other people and nobody 
could get any cell sites and I said I got to try at 
least to let her know that I'm okay, because I'm sure 
she was going to be panicking. 

My cell phone went through the first time. 
It happened again the second time and I called her and 
I said I'm okay the second time. My son was playing 
and I said don't bother him. We walked up to West 
Street, right after I saw Grace and I called my wife 
back and I said I need to talk to my son. He is just 
coming up on 3 years old. I said I need to talk to him 
and he is so innocent to the world and he just said, he 
said Daddy, what are you doing. I said to him, I said 
Daddy's at work now, but you know I love you. He said 
okay Daddy, I will see you later. 

That was -- I have another son who is six 
months old, so I couldn't talk to him, but that's what 
got me through. That's what got me through. He still 
asks me every day, he says you know, is Daddy going to 
work. I says yes, Daddy is going to work. He says you 
coming home? And he knows. He knows that something 



24 
M. STONE 



happened. 

I'm not quite sure he knows what and I pray 
to God that he never ever has to know for many years . 
God is good all the time. God brought me home to my 
boys. We go on. There was a lot of other stuff, 
reactions of people, direction that was given. Just 
happened to find out that the three initial crews that 
I brought in made it out. People that were closer made 
it out. 

I did see Carlos Lillo for a while. I 
remember he was looking for his wife. The last I saw 
him, he was still looking for her. He was outside 
somewhere. I don't remember exactly where I saw him, 
but I remember I talked to him because I happen to know 
him, because my wife worked with him at a station years 
ago. I pray for him and his family and Ricardo's 
family, all the other families. I pray for them every 
day. 

It's just as a field commander, you play over 
the decisions you make every day. Did I make the right 
decision. I played it over a million times in my head 
and I said, I keep saying to myself I don't think given 
the same scenario tomorrow everything that I know in 
all my years of training, my command experience, what 



25 
M. STONE 



would I have done differently. I can't come up with 
anything, I don't think. 

Nobody in the world, nobody ever would ever 
have thought these buildings were coming down. That's 
what we do. We go to lobbies and do triage and upper 
floors and do forward triage. We just make decisions. 
I hope I made good decisions. I know that thank God, 
nobody who was under my command that day suffered any 
ill effects. I know because I researched that 
everybody went home okay at the end of the day. That 
was pretty important to me. 

There's a lot of other things that go through 
my head, but that's pretty much the bulk of what went 
on that morning. 

Q. Anything else you want to add, any final 
thoughts? 

A. No, I just -- every day I just pray that this 
new war on terrorism -- I pray to God that our 
President, President Bush, gets us through this. Mayor 
Giuliani did a fantastic job, still does a fantastic 
job, I pray for our Commissioner, who is tired 
himself. I see him every day on TV. I have seen him a 
few times in person since then. He is a tired man, but 
he has given everything. There is nothing more that he 



26 
M. STONE 



can give and I just pray that God gives him 
-- continues to give him the strength. 

Chief Nigro, who is now our Chief of the 
Department. Chief Cassano, Chief of Operations, Chief 
McCracken, Chief of EMS, I just pray that they continue 
to have the strength to take us through these really 
tough times. That senior officials. I knew Chief 
Ganci . He knew me. Not so much on a personal level 
but more professional. That I pray for their families, 
Commissioner Feehan, Chief Feehan. Recently with them 
just a week before, at a dedication for the Central 
Synagogue that was burned down a few years ago. Chief 
Burns. All the Chiefs, I pray that God gives them 
strength to take us forward and that if there was 
anything that could have tipped us off that this was 
going to happen, we find it and that we learn from it. 
I don't see any mistakes. We just have the strength as 
leaders; myself, that we go forward. 

Good leaders and good commanders and God 
gives us that strength. So we will get through this. 
I'm sure we will. I just hope that history looks 
kindly on us . A lot of people and I don't even really 
include myself, but a lot of people. I saw strong men 
have to cry that day. I see strong leaders who are the 



27 
M. STONE 



rock of this organization who are the backbone of this 
organization, get tired. 

I just -- I pray God gives them a little 
break, that they can take a breath and step back and 
just get a break. They all need it. They are tired. 
They give their all. I just hope they find some peace 
and rest. 

I guess that's about it. 

MS. BASTEDENBECK: Okay. That concludes our 
interview with Captain Mark Stone. Thank you for 
your time. The time is now 926 hours. 



File No. 9110077 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

CHIEF ULYSSES GRANT 

Interview Date: October 12, 2001 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



U. GRANT 2 

MR. TAMBASCO: Today is October 12th. 
The time is 1318 hours. I'm Mike Tambasco 
of the World Trade Center Task Force 
conducting an interview into the events of 
September 11th at the World Trade Center. 
We'll be conducting this interview with 
Chief Grant. 

Chief, would you just be good enough to 
identify yourself and your command? 

CHIEF GRANT: My name is Chief Ulysses 
Grant. I'm currently assigned to the Fire 
Department EMS Bureau, EMS Division 5. 

MR. TAMBASCO: We're in the conference 
room of EMS Battalion 43. 

Q. Chief, if you would just be good enough 
to give me your memory of the events. 

A. To the best of my recollection, it 
started out to be a normal day for me and my 
aide. Basically we were at Staten Island. I was 
doing some administrative work. And I believe 
the young lady that works also there with us, 
Ms. Alice Suskowitz came in while I was in my 
office and said Chief, did you hear, a plane just 
went into a building at the World Trade Center. 



U. GRANT 3 

I said what? 

I'm in my office. I have a television. 
I turn it on. Sure enough, there was coverage of 
the World Trade Center being struck with an 
airplane. We were all watching. 

My next thing was to a little more 
carefully monitor the citywide radio. I could 
hear a lot of radio transmissions over the air. 
I didn't necessarily associate it with a person, 
but I could hear there was a lot of talking going 
over the citywide radio. 

A combination of listening to the radio 
and watching the events as they unfolded on 
television, I said you know what, I've got to 
make a decision here, it's either to go to the 
event or, knowing the magnitude of this type of 
event, maybe my resources might be needed at 
headquarters or something of that nature. I made 
the decision to go to the event. 

Surprisingly we got there very quickly. 
I think probably what assisted that was the HOV 
lane on the BQE where you can jump right in and 
make better egress in getting there. The other 
thing that I remember was that at some points 



U. GRANT 4 

along that HOV route there were police officers 
there, I guess in an effort to direct traffic for 
an event that had already taken place. 

So we got there relatively quickly. I 
remember we got as far as we could and got out of 
the Battery Tunnel. I remember there was a large 
number of police officers right as we got to the 
end of the Battery Tunnel, waving us on, come on, 
come on. We got through the tunnel. 

I remember we got to a point as close 
as we could, and there were other emergency 
vehicles responding. We got north to west. What 
I remember is all of a sudden there was someone 
like pushing us back saying go back, go back. I 
don't think that was in reference to either the 
towers falling at that point; however, reference 
to maybe some debris that was coming down over in 
that area. 

So we pulled back as far as we could, 
and we got out and pulled on our turnout jackets, 
helmets, made sure we had radios, helmets, cell 
phones, whatever normally we would take to an MCI 
response. 

I remember as I was walking up I 



U. GRANT 5 

noticed Chief McCracken several feet ahead of me 
walking as well with his lieutenant. Lieutenant 
Cronin was also there. 

Q. That was up West Street? 

A. Walking up West. We were walking up. 
You know you could see what was going on and we 
were going in that direction. We got to a point 
where we saw several municipal ambulances there, 
Hazollah members were there and there were all 
sorts of voluntaries. I'm not quite sure which 
ones they were. 

At that point Chief McCracken had given 
me some directions to start setting up a 
treatment center, because we knew the resources 
we had. And we were going over some of the 
safety issues like making sure people stay 
together, making sure what officers we have, 
taking on certain roles. As a matter of fact, 
Captain D'Amato was there also. He had been 
there a while. 

Q. Chief, could I just interrupt and ask 
you whereabouts was that, where this took place? 

A. One of the points that I remember was 
that Chief McCracken actually asked what street 



U. GRANT 6 

we're on. At that point we looked and the street 
sign was indicating South End. The other street 
sign wasn't necessarily visible. However, I 
think, you know, just looking at surroundings and 
looking at this map, it was probably Liberty or 
in that vicinity, one block over. 
Q. Great. 

A. Chief McCracken was discussing about 
setting up this treatment sector. Basically we 
agreed to move it somewhat further back. I was 
walking with some of the Hazollah or the chief 
representative of Hazollah to explain to him that 
the people should stay together, let it be you 
that I communicate with as responsible for 
Hazollah, let it be Captain D'Amato for the 
municipal and voluntary resources and so forth. 
So we were in the process of doing that. 

The next thing I remember is I saw 
people running in my direction, not even a full 
walk up but just people running. I said what the 
hell, what are they running from? I didn't have 
a clue there. 

People talk about -- you know since the 
incident they talk about hearing this loud 



U. GRANT 7 

thunderous sound. To the best of my knowledge, I 
don't remember hearing anything. However, I do 
remember seeing this loud, large cloud coming 
about like it was turning a corner and coming in 
my direction. 

So I also turned and ran. What I 
remember seeing when I was running was a Hazollah 
truck. It was open. The back of the truck was 
open. Not that I had full conscious coherence of 
what was going on, but I said you know what, let 
me duck in here because there's stuff coming down 
from somewhere. Let me duck in here. 

So I jumped in the back of the truck. 
There were other people there that jumped in the 
back of the vehicle with me. I remember it 
immediately filling up with stuff and you hear 
the tingling of the particles and whatever it was 
that was coming down, just filling it up, filling 
it up. At some point I couldn't even see in 
front of me. 

I do remember someone kicking at the 
door trying to get the door of the vehicle open. 
There was a problem in opening it, but it 
eventually opened. There was someone in front of 



U. GRANT 8 

me. I was feeling my way. And I latched onto 
their belt in the back. To be quite honest, I 
wasn't letting go because I couldn't see. I had 
no concept of what was going on. I just held 
onto that person. 

He went forward; I was right behind 
him. Within a few -- I don't know, maybe 30 feet 
or whatever it might have been, we more or less 
fell into a building. It seems like we just fell 
into a building, rolled in. We all were covered 
with dust. I had no idea still what the hell was 
going on here. 

I remember a young --it looked like a 
young black woman. She looked like she was a 
secretary of some sort. A gentleman was at his 
desk working, like where did you people come 
from? We just stumbled in. 

I remember being very confused, not 
knowing what happened and anyone that was around 
me, I no longer saw. So one of my first thoughts 
is where the heck is my aide? Where is she? She 
was here a few minutes ago. Where is she? And 
the people around me, where are they? What 
happened? 



U. GRANT 9 

The dust settled somewhat. I 
started -- there was a Hazollah member there. He 
started brushing his clothes off and trying to 
get rid of some of the debris on his helmet and 
clothes. Then I remember saying wait a minute, 
we can't stay here. I don't see anybody I know. 
It's not a good idea, I don't think, to stay 
here. We've got to move on. 

I wasn't sure if that was the right 
thing to do, but I decided to go out. And as I 
went out, I walked several feet and I remember 
now meeting an EMT who I now identify as an EMT 
that works for me out at Battalion 22, Rothmund. 
And he said Chief, I don't know, where are you 
going? I said we've got to go. We can't stay 
here. We've got to go. He said well, if you're 
going to go -- and he gave me a bottle of water 
and some paper towels. He said wet these down 
and cover your mouth if you're going to go. 

I traveled a little further, wandered 
up into this deli. I remember seeing fruit 
around, the people not comfortable with what was 
going around. The owner was there, but there was 
a lot of confusion. I stayed there very 



U. GRANT 10 

momentarily, found out where the exit was to get 
out of there, and moved on. 

The next thing I know I found myself 
over in what I believe now was the Battery Park 
area. We were there. A lot of people had begun 
to gather. I remember someone walking up behind 
me who later was identified as Lieutenant Cronin. 
I said where's Chief McCracken? She said right 
now I don't really know. I said where are you 
going? She said Chief, I'm following you. 

So we walked a little bit. There were 
a large number of people there. One of the 
things I distinctly remember was that Al Simons, 
who was the supervisor of Maimonides Hospital, 
had also been hurt and he was on a stretcher. 
There were several members of Hazollah working to 
get him out of the location of where we were. 

It was a small boat, if you will, that 
approached at the water. However, I'm looking 
over it and looking at what they were trying to 
do. I saw it was at least 30 feet separating him 
on the stretcher and being able to go into the 
boat. I remember distinctly telling them: You 
can't do this, no, no, don't lower him in there, 



U. GRANT 11 

don't even think about it. So they brought him 
out . 

I then saw Chief McCracken. He was 
coming around and he was speaking. What I do 
remember is I said to him: Chief, what do we do 
now? What are we going to do? He said you can't 
go anywhere. I said we can't stay here. He said 
look over there. If you look back there, you 
could see the large dust and debris falling from 
the first tower. The only other thing you could 
see was the water. We weren't going in either 
direction . 

So we were there. Then I remember the 
people that were around me were very panicky. 
There were a lot of civilians that were very 
panicky. What they had told them to do was lay 
down, cover your heads and remain calm. It seems 
like they followed that direction because we were 
the only ones giving any directions. 

So they basically followed. They laid 
down, and they were crying and very upset. I 
remember a lady next to me being very upset and 
saying we're going to die, we're going to die. I 
said we're not going to die; we're going to be 



U. GRANT 12 

okay. 

There then was a larger vessel -- I 
don't know if it was one of the ferries or not -- 
that came close and someone there of authority 
made the decision that it should be women and 
children first to get on the boat and go. It 
sort of like reminded me of the movie the 
Titanic, and that's what it felt like. 

What we were doing at that point was 
looking in the crowd and calling up women that we 
saw with children or whatever, and we were 
putting them on. We were handing them over to 
the guys that were on the other end of the boat, 
putting them on. 

We did that for several minutes. I 
remember a woman that looked like she was either 
Latino or Hispanic but, somewhat bewildered. You 
could see that there was a communication gap with 
her and what was going on. So I went a little 
bit into the crowd, and I pulled the woman with 
the baby carriage out and got her on. 

All this time there were people 
pressing up real tight against me, against me 
real tight. I remember that. So I went after 



U. GRANT 13 

that was done and I sat down. It was like a 
little bench area, not benches but a grass area 
with some sort of cement covering. I sat there 
for a while. 

I started being short of breath. I 
just was gasping for air, gasping. I sat there, 
figuring the best thing to do at that point was 
just be still for right now. 

I heard like a noise coming up out 
behind me, and it was a Lutheran ambulance that 
came out of nowhere. And they proceeded to load 
Al Simons, who was the supervisor for Maimonides. 
I remember another gentleman sitting in the 
ambulance who had an apparent leg injury, and it 
was starting to throb and hurt. 

There was a big, heavyset paramedic, 
white pants, blue shirts, very stocky guy, and 
another person. Someone said Chief, you've got 
to go. You've got to get up in here. They more 
or less pulled me up into the back of the truck. 
We started out slowly. 

I was under the impression, I guess 
obviously with other people in here, we were 
going to the hospital. We got out. We were all 



U. GRANT 14 

in confusion there. I could see the guy being 
flagged on. They gave me oxygen and had me sit 
in the corner. 

We got into the Battery Tunnel, and the 
ambulance began to overheat because the guy was 
slowing down. The Battery Tunnel was at that 
point full of all of the smoke and whatever else 
was coming in. I could see it just coming in. 
The guy, you know, he had to shut down the AC 
because it was overheating. 

Al Simon yelled at him: Keep going, 
keep going, keep going, don't stop. Meanwhile I 
don't think he supervised the Lutheran guys, but 
he yelled keep going, keep going. We got out of 
the tunnel, and the next thing you know not long 
after we were at Lutheran Hospital. They threw 
oxygen on me there. I had a couple of them see 
me. I told them I'm fine. I'm just having a 
problem breathing, but I feel a lot better, I 
feel a lot better. 

I settled down. I saw Bill Killeps, 
who was the ambulance supervisor at Lutheran, a 
little later on. He offered me some help or 
whatever the case. 



U. GRANT 15 

I remember seeing he looked like a 
priest or a fellow at the phone, one of the phone 
booths near the treat -- I guess it's the asthma 
treatment area. It looked like he got through on 
the phone. 

As soon as he hung up, I jumped up, 
because my impulse was to call my wife and let 
her know that I'm here, I'm okay, because I know 
she would be watching the news or heard about it 
and things were going to go through her head. So 
I said even if she just hears my voice she will 
settle down. 

So I was able to call out. I got 
through. Settled her down. I'm all right. I'll 
be here. I couldn't see very well. In fact, I 
needed to flush my eyes at some point. After I 
felt better, they took the oxygen off, basically 
said, okay, Chief, go on. 

I wandered outside. They were 
periodically bringing people in from the event. 
There was a park across the street, and no one 
was in the park. They had cordoned it off, 
quarantined it off. I went into the park and sat 
down just to get my thoughts. 



U. GRANT 16 

All along one of the things -- I did 
have my cell phone. I had not accounted for my 
aide yet. So I called her home, and I guess it 
was fortunate that I got no answer, because 
sometimes her daughter is home. Fortunately I 
got no answer, because I guess I wanted to know 
where was she, but I didn't know and it would 
only be frightening for me to say well, I, her 
supervisor, don't know where she is. 

So I called her division and I spoke 
with Alice who's there, the PAA. She said oh, 
Chief, you're okay. I said I'm going to be okay. 
Have you heard from Mary, my aide. She said 
Chief, we haven't heard from her. I said my 
phone's working, my pager seems to be working. I 
was getting pages. 

I sat in that park for a while, just 
kept flushing my eyes with water. There was an 
ambulance crew that gave me some water. I kept 
flushing my eyes out, like that. I finally got a 
page from Alice. I called her. She said Chief, 
we found Mary. I said thank God. 

So I said where is she? She said stay 
there, she's going to come pick you up. I said 



U. GRANT 17 

how the hell is she going to pick me up? In 
what? What is she going to pick me up in? I 
thought for sure the car was destroyed. 

So sure enough, I guess about 40 
minutes later, here she comes pulling up in the 
car, looking like crap, all kind of shit on it, 
and she comes out, all dusted up. I said thank 
God you're okay. I got in the car, went in and 
washed off in one of the other areas at one of 
the battalions. 

And that was the day, a very 
unforgettable day. 

Q. Unforgettable, I'm sure. 

A. I think back many times and I consider 
all of the other things going on in my life right 
now and I said God was on my side this day and I 
should be thankful for that. It was really some 
experience. I'll never forget it. I'm sure I'm 
not the only person. I hope that things work 
out . 

Q. All right, Chief. I thank you. Is 
there anything else you can think of you'd like 
to add to that? 

A. No, I think that pretty much covers -- 



U. GRANT 18 

summarizes that day. I don't remember looking 
directly at the buildings coming down. I know 
that when we first got there that day. I saw 
what I thought was a rag or something falling off 
one of the buildings. The person standing next 
to me said Chief, that's a person. But you could 
see it was burning. 

But I remember distinctly people just 
running, running, wondering what's going on. 
Then it wasn't long after that there was debris 
and stuff coming down from the World Trade Center 
had descended upon us. The only choice was to 
run. I don't think it was a question of saying 
what do I do next . 

The only option was to run at that 
point and take cover. That's what I believe most 
people did. I guess some had more advantage 
being either closer to a building or a place 
where they could get into, and some of us were 
just left wide out in the open. 

There was a Hazollah truck, and I 
remember diving in there and some other people 
dove in with me, still not knowing what was going 
on around us. 



U. GRANT 19 

So I'm thankful and thank God I'm here 
today. I thank God for the people who have 
survived it. My heart and thoughts go out to 
those who didn't because those people came to 
work that day, whether they were civilians or 
firemen or EMS workers, not knowing what to 
expect, certainly no expectation of losing their 
life that day. I guess it's just the will of 
God. That's about it. 

Q. Once again, Chief, I thank you. 
MR. TAMBASCO: This interview is 

concluded at 1337 hours. 



File No. 911007E 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

MARY MCMILLAN 

Interview Date: October 12, 2001 



Transcribed by Elisabeth F. Nason 



m. McMillan 

MR. TAMBASCO: Today is October 12. My name 
is Mike Tambasco. Assigned to the World Trade 
Center Task Force. We are conducting an interview 
today into the events of September 11 at the World 
Trade Center. The time of the interview starting 
is at 1254 hours. 

Q. Our interview today is with -- 
A. Mary McMillan. I was assigned with Chief 
Grant, car 65 on 9-11. We parked our car on the West 
Side Highway. 

Q. If I could ask you, could you start with when 
you first heard about what was going on, when you were 
responding? 

A. Okay. We were at Division 5 on Staten 
Island. They heard the call, Joe LaBarbera, who was 
(inaudible) . He heard the call and the Chief was 
listening to it also. He said Mary get your coat and 
let's go. So we left. I was driving. 

We followed -- took the BQE to the tunnel and 
parked on the West Side Highway. Someone told us don't 
come any further, stay where you are, and we did. 
There were other cars behind me. We couldn't go any 
further, so we got out and walked over to the command 
post, where we met Chief McCracken. I believe that was 



m. McMillan 

at South End and Liberty Street. 

While I was there I was asked by Chief Grant 
to gather a list of resources. I didn't have a piece 
of paper with me, so I got it from Kathleen Zarr. I 
met her and I met also Mala Harrilal and Brian 
Pastore. I don't recall who else I seen there at that 
time . 

As I was gathering it, I was saying to Mala, 
that I'm looking up at the building and I said to her, 
this is going to fall. I said we should get out of 
here. This is going to fall. She says I know. I 
think we are in the wrong place. I tried to tell Chief 
Grant and Chief McCracken I think it's going to fall, 
but they were so busy talking among themselves, I 
didn't have a chance to tell them what I was feeling. 

I think I should have shared with everyone, 
but when I felt that way, I looked around me. I 
gathered the resources, but I'm thinking what do I do 
when this thing falls. I looked around me and I saw 
this building on my right. It had the glass bottom 
doors and I just made reference to it in case god 
forbid, anything happened, my plan would be to run 
behind that building, grab my jacket over my head and 
just stay there for a while. 



m. McMillan 

Sure enough, after my thoughts travelled 
through my head, all I heard was run and I heard the 
sound, a sound -- I can't really describe it. It was 
an unusual sound. Then they are saying run, so I 
started to run and I looked back and I saw this white 
smoke just moving in this boiling motion towards us and 
I was like oh, my god, what's going on. I was scared, 
I was frightened and I'm running and everybody's 
running . 

Someone grabbed on to my hands. I don't know 
who it is. I was dragged, literally dragged on the 
ground. I said let me go please. Let me go. Let me 
go. So he let me go. I got up on my feet and he said 
get the fuck in here now. I went in there. I didn't 
want to go in there because I'm thinking this thing 
that's falling down is going to crash the glass that 
surrounds this building. 

So we got under there and I just broke down 
in tears, and the debris, I was covered in debris at 
that time. I ran inside and they closed the door. I 
stood by some console table. I took my helmet off and 
I said oh, my god we are going to die. We are going to 
die. I was so afraid and then they said shut up. Shut 
up. Stop saying that. 



m. McMillan 



Then it calmed down somewhat and everybody 
started leaving the building. Now we are not making 
any friends, everybody is just trying to get out. I 
was my ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^| 



I don't think they had a plan. What's 
going on with them. 

Q. You lost sight of them completely? 

A. Yes. So when I got out I walked, looking in 
the area where I left them. Because I didn't look back 
or anything. I just ran and I didn't see anyone. 
Everybody is looking for everybody. Everybody is 
covered in this white dust. You can't breathe. You 
could hardly see. You are looking for water. There 
were people out there giving you bottles of water. 
They said wash your face, wash your hands. It felt 
like something was sticking you when you washed your 
face. I guess little pieces of glass, because when I 
got home also. When I washed my face. There was 
something sticking me. Like glass in my face. 

So I got the water and I washed my face and 
my hands and I started looking for them. I walked up 
South End I believe. I was walking in the opposite 
direction now and I saw Chief McCracken approaching 
me. I said where is Chief Grant. He said oh, he is in 



m. McMillan 

the store down the block. Just a couple of stores 
down. Just keep walking. 

So I decided to walk just to look for him and 
I looked in every building I passed. I didn't see 
him. I just saw a lot of people. I don't recall who I 
saw. I asked them if they had seen Chief Grant. 
Everybody is no, no, I didn't see him. I don't know. 

So I walked further, further back and forth, 
back where I was, further, looking around and up the 
stairs to some store above there. They says come, wash 
your face off. I said I'm fine. I'm good. Leave me 
alone. They gave me water. I took the water and says 
here, you need a mask, take a mask, they gave me a mask 
and I put that on and that helped so much. That mask 
helped me out. 

Then I walked over to -- going towards the 
water, because everybody says get towards the water. 
It's better over there. So I started to walk towards 
the water and I walked up and down looking for him. I 
said anybody seen -- I asked, because I think I seen 
everybody who I met there initially except Chief 
Grant. Then I walked around the water and I saw 
Kathleen Zarr again and she says let's go in this 
building and set up triage for anyone with asthma, 



m. McMillan 

which she did. 

I met Captain D'Amato. I met him and he 
looked so out of it, like he wasn't there. 

Q. Dazed? 

A. Dazed. I said to him let me borrow your 
radio and I intercepted transmission asking for Chief 
Grant. I didn't know where he was and he says take 
it. I said are you okay? Didn't answer me. Just sat 
there in a daze. They did triage and the next thing 
you know we saw a boat coming in and they says get back 
in the building, because the other building was coming 
down now. This big ball of smoke overcame the building 
again and we stayed inside there and did the triage. 
We tried to make some sense of what's going on. 
Everybody is talking and confused, people with their 
children, with their dogs and their family and the 
boats started to come closer to the water. 

I don't know where I was then. But the boats 
came over. There is a place. 

Q. I think there is a little dock. 

A. At a corner, a very corner, like a corner, 
corner, and a building is here and the water is 
circulating here. And there is a corner. People could 
walk down towards like -- 



m. McMillan 

Q. Like a pier? 

A. Like a pier. Walk down towards it and then 
the boats were there and we directed the people to get 
on to the boats . 

Q. It was civilians, it was everybody? 

A. Civilians, people from the building, 
children, anybody who wanted to get out of there. 
After that I saw Chief McCracken again. I said did you 
see Chief Grant. He said no. I said have you seen him 
at all. He said yes, I saw him. He's down that way. 
He is okay. He is okay. I think that I was just being 
pacified at that moment, because I don't think he seen 
him, but when I met Chief Grant he told me he did see 
him one time. 

After that I saw -- who was it? I don't 
recall who it was that drove me on the gator, that 
drove us on the gator over to a much better area. We 
are getting further away from the building. 

Q. Further down south towards the ferry terminal 
and stuff? 

A. Yes, closer there. There was like a park, a 
park like area. You could sit down and you know, 
benches over there. I met the Chief, Chief Villani was 
there, then I saw Captain D'Amato over there also. We 



m. McMillan 

were talking and I says can't anybody just ask, 
somebody just tell me what do I do to find out if he's 
okay. He says he is fine, Chief McCracken told me he 
is fine. I said Chief Villani what do I do. What do I 
do to find out. I have no phone. My phone is not 
working. I don't know what's going on. He just took 
Captain D'Amato's radio from me at that point and never 
said anything to me. 

Then they took me over to the ferry terminal 
where the command post was set up and I sat there for a 
while. I went and cleaned up in the bathroom, but I 
went back out. I went back looking. 

Q. Back north up to go looking for him again? 
A. To the same spot. But I went in and out. I 
went in and out of the streets looking and nothing. I 
did that maybe about three times from the command post 
and back there. After that I stayed there, because 
after receiving like numerous pages from Division 5, I 
didn't answer it, I think it was Alice, just wanting to 
know hey, are you okay. So I didn't bother. 

I settled down. I calmed down a bit and 
that's when I made the phone call to Division 5 and 
Alice told me that Chief Grant was admitted at the 
hospital and he is okay and he just wanted to know if 



10 

m. McMillan 



you were okay. So now they heard from me, everybody 
was fine. 

After that, I said to her, just tell Chief 
Grant I'm going to bring the car. I left a whole lot 
out. I'm going ahead of myself. 

Q. That's okay. 

A. I said tell Chief Grant stay there. I'm 
coming. That's all I said and I hung up. I had at 
some point when I walked back, one of those times I 
walked back to the area. I moved the car, it was 
filled with debris, you couldn't see anything and the 
cars were coming back and forth just covering you in 
more debris . 

I turned the car around, I put it in a 
different direction. At least I said if you see the 
car in a different direction you will know that I'm 
alive, because I'm the only one with the other key. So 
I cleaned the car out somewhat, and I drove over to 
Brooklyn. The Brooklyn Bridge? Yes, the Brooklyn 
Bridge, and I made it over and I went to Lutheran 
Hospital and I saw Chief Grant. I left the scene 
entirely. 

Q. What hospital was that? 

A. Lutheran Hospital. That was it. When that 



11 
m. McMillan 



debris fell and I first ran into that building, I 
didn't think that I would make it out alive. I never 
thought I would see the next day. I practically gave 
up hope, thinking that this is it, this is my destiny. 
Here I am. Take it. I'm giving it up all right now. 

That was my story. I thank god I'm here 
right now. 

Q. Another quite interesting story. There has 
been a whole lot of them. There really have been, 
yes. Is there anything else that you can think of that 
you would like to put into this? 

A. Not really. 

Q. Okay. 

A. I never even seen Mala or Frank to see how 
they are doing. I don't know even know if they are 
okay, but we didn't have any fatalities or anything. 

Q. Right. As far as I know I have been -- as 
far as I know I believe both of them are okay. 

A. Oh, you know. 

Q. Well, Frank I know, I'm pretty sure he is 
okay? 

A. And Katherine, she is home recuperating. 
MR. TAMBASCO: Right, so, but, yes, well, 

okay, Mary, thank you for the interview. This 



12 

m. McMillan 



interview is concluding at 1305 hours. 



File No. 9110082 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMT PETER CACHIA 
Interview Date: October 15, 2001 



Transcribed by Elisabeth F. Nason 



P. CACHIA 

MS. BASTEDENBECK: Today is October 15, 

2001. The time now is 655 hours. My name is 

Christine Bastedenbeck with the New York City Fire 

Department, conducting an interview with the 

following individual. 

Q. Please state your name, rank, title and 
assigned command area of the New York City Fire 
Department . 

A. My name is Peter Cachia. I'm an EMT with the 
New York City Fire Department, assigned to Battalion 4. 

Q. Also present today is -- 

A. Christopher Eccleston of the New York Fire 
Department World Trade Center Task Force. 

Q. Mr. Cachia, we would like you to relay your 
experience on the events of September 11, 2001. 

A. On September 11, 2001, I was assigned to my 
Battalion in a light duty status, secondary to an 
injury back in the past. At approximately, let's see, 
right before the first plane hit the first tower, 
myself and the two Lieutenants on duty were at the desk 
and we heard the radio transmission that a plane had 
just crashed into the World Trade Centers. 

I remember the conditions boss leaving to go 
to the scene, and the desk Lieutenant on duty was 



P. CACHIA 

basically getting things in order. People were coming 
in. He was assigning them ambulances to go to the 
scene. After a few minutes of that, the Lieutenant had 
left and he had given me the keys to the station and 
said I was to -- anybody who came into the station, I 
was to get them to the scene, give them a radio and an 
ambulance and have them go to the scene. 

About 9, 5 after 9 or 10 after 9, Lieutenant 
Amy Monroe came to the station and asked me if I could 
drive her to the scene. I advised her that I was on 
light duty. She said-- she asked me if I could drive 
and I said yes I can, as long as I didn't have to do 
any heavy lifting. She said okay. 

We then proceeded to the scene, parked the 
ambulance on Cortlandt Street and then we proceeded to 
the first triage center, which was on Church Street, 
basically in front of the Trade Center complex. 

Q. I'm going to ask you to mark on the map with 
the number 1 where you parked your vehicle. Do you 
know the vehicle number? 

A. 13. 

Q. Vehicle 13? 

A. Yes. At that time when we proceeded to the 
triage center, at this time both towers had been 



P. CACHIA 

struck. We met up with the triage Lieutenants there. 
I think Lieutenant Medjuck was on scene. Lieutenant 
D'Avila, Lieutenant Melaragno were all on scene. We 
started treating the patients as they came out. I saw 
a few of my partners that I worked with in their units 
there. They were treating patients in their 
ambulances . 

We were there maybe for about 25 minutes or 
so and that triage center had been getting a little 
crowded, so Lieutenant Monroe had asked me if there was 
another triage center. I said I think there was one on 
Liberty Street, so she had asked me to go to that 
triage center and to see if they were taking, you know, 
patients over there or if they needed help or 
anything . 

So I left her and I went to -- I was on the 
way to the second triage center when the first tower 
started coming down, which would be, I guess the south 
tower was coming down. When that started coming down, 
I basically turned around and like everyone else, I 
started running up the block, but due to my injury -- 

Q. Which way were you running, do you know? 

A. I was running -- I guess this is, let me just 
get my bearing, this would be northeast. 



P. CACHIA 

Q. On Liberty? 

A. Up Liberty. I was very close. I was like a 
little too close to the tower when it started coming 
down, because when I started running, I knew I was too 
close and I really didn't think I was going to get out 
of there. So about halfway up Liberty Street I saw a 
truck, I guess an SUV. It wasn't a police or a fire 
vehicle. It was just a car that was parked there. I 
went under the truck while the tower came down and the 
ground was shaking and the truck was shaking and I 
thought that was it for me. I thought I was done. 

I stayed under there until I guess everything 
was over. I remember opening my eyes and looking out 
and it was just pitch black. I guess after a few 
minutes after it cleared up, after I opened my eyes, I 
looked out and it was bright out again. I got from 
under the truck and I went back up Liberty, which was 
now just a pile of rubble and I went to go back to the 
triage center where I was, where we started out and 
everybody had gone from there. 

So I just continued going up Church Street 
and when I got to Church and Fulton Street, I met up 
with Lieutenant D'Avila again and he told -- said let's 
get out of here, the second one might be coming down. 



P. CACHIA 

So then we went back up Fulton Street and the second 
tower had come down, but we were far enough away from 
it, but again, like everybody else, we just ran. 

After that, I remembered running down Fulton 
Street and going into a store, seeing the cloud of dust 
going by from the second tower and then hearing it 
coming down. 

Q. At that time, were you with any other EMS 
personnel or fire personnel? 

A. No, Lieutenant D'Avila had gone one way and I 
went the other way. When I came out, I started going 
back to the scene, but now my back was just bothering 
me a lot. I turned around and I was walking towards 
Downtown Beekman Hospital. I walked towards there. As 
I was walking towards there two police officers had saw 
me and they saw that I was in pain and I could hardly 
walk and they helped me down to Beekman Hospital. 

I got to Beekman Hospital and the doctors, 
you know, they rinsed me off, because I was just 
covered in that dust. They asked me what the problem 
was. I said, you know, I have 3 herniated disks in my 
back. I'm fine. I just need to rest, just take care 
of everybody, because they were -- I mean -- they were 
overrun with patients. 



P. CACHIA 

I said just take care of everybody else. I'm 
fine. I just got to rest a little bit. So I sat down 
for a few minutes. I remember being in the hospital. 
I remember hearing somebody saying that they crashed a 
plane into the Pentagon also, so it was like just 
unbelievable what was going on. I stayed in the 
hospital for a little while. 

Then I walked back down towards South Street 
and as I was walking down South Street, I was going 
past - I forgot the name -- there is like an apartment 
complex right across from Beekman Hospital and that was 
also being set up as a triage center. As I walked past 
there, I saw Lieutenant D'Avila. He said come inside, 
just rest for a little while. So I went in there and 
sat down for a few minutes. I stayed there for a few 
minutes and as I left, I walked out and I walked back 
down to South Street and at that time I flagged down a 
police car. He had taken me back to the station, 
because I was just in too much pain where I couldn't do 
anything after that. 

So I came back to the station. I just 
basically stayed here for a little while. At the end 
of my shift at 3: GO, the Lieutenant just said for me 
just to go home. I went home. I mean I didn't want 



P. CACHIA 

to, but I was basically useless, because I couldn't -- 
my back was just in severe pain. I really wasn't any 
good to anybody. There wasn't anything to do here. We 
didn't have any phones or anything to answer, no 
computer to go on. 

So that's about it. That's basically the day 
I don't think any of us will forget. Something that I 
never thought I would see in my life. Just lucky to be 
alive I guess. I guess it just wasn't my time. 

Q. Is there anything else you would like to add 
to this about the events that happened prior to 12 
noon? 

A. No, I mean it's -- I don't know. It's just 
as a service, as an EMS service, I think we were very 
lucky. From the units from this Battalion being the 
first ones down there and us not losing anybody is a 
miracle. 

Q. At any time, did you go into either one of 
the towers? 

A. No. I mean I didn't want to, I really 
didn't. I mean I don't think anybody thought they 
would come down. I don't know, just I remember getting 
there and just looking up and just seeing these two 
gaping holes in the side of these buildings. It was 



P. CACHIA 

just like watching a movie. I remember after the first 
one got hit, we all went out the door out here. 

When it came over a plane crashed into the 
Trade Center, okay, a little Cessna. We didn't know 
until we went out and we looked and we saw and we all 
said this wasn't a Cessna. I remember coming back 
here. At that time the TV still worked. We had the TV 
on channel 4 news. We were watching it. I remember 
watching the news and looking and seeing the second 
plane going into it . 

I said oh, my god. Is that the first plane 
or is that the second plane. I saw it was the second 
plane and then I remembered hearing Lieutenant D'Avila 
coming over the radio and saying Central be advised, a 
second plane just went into the second tower. We ran 
out and we saw the second plane. 

It was like watching a movie. It really 
was. Something that you never thought you would see 
and something that you never comprehend. It's just a 
day, like I said, nobody will ever forget. 

MS. BASTEDENBECK: Thank you for your time 
and your thoughts. This interview is concluded at 
706 hours. 



File No. 9110083 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

EMT THOMAS J . BENDICK 

Interview Date: October 15, 2001 



Transcribed by Elisabeth F. Nason 



T.J. BENDICK 

MR. ECCLESTON: Today's date is October 15, 

20Q1. The time is 745 hours. This is Christopher 

Eccleston of the New York City Fire Department. 

I'm conducting an interview with the following 

individual. 

Q. Please state your name, rank, title and 
assigned command of the Fire Department of the City of 
New York regarding the events of September 11, 2001. 

A. Thomas J. Bendick. Emergency medical 
technician, assigned to Division 1. 

Q. Also present? 

A. Christine Bastedenbeck of the New York City 
Fire Department. 

Q. Thomas, can you tell us about the events of 
September 11, 2001. 

A. Approximately I guess sometime around 9:45 or 
earlier, I arrived at work. I met up with one of the 
guys from the Division, Duane Walker, and myself and 
him responded to the World Trade Center incident, and 
parked our vehicle, which was an empty ambulance full 
of supplies, someplace approximately Fulton and 
Trinity, I guess near St. Pauls cemetery, where 
Lieutenant Melarango was on scene triaging patients. 
Exited the vehicle. We left our vehicle at that 



T. J. BENDICK 

location . 

Q. Can you mark on the map with a number 1 where 
you parked your vehicle? 

A. Right about there, I guess. 

Q. Also, would you happen to know what vehicle 
number it was? 

A. I honestly do not. 300 series, one of the 
newer ambulances. I wasn't driving. I was the 
passenger. That vehicle was parked there and left 
there with supplies in the back. It wasn't being used 
for transporting patients. It was full of backboards. 
As I exited the vehicle , I spoke to the guys with 
Duane and said I was going to go to the command post to 
meet up with the Chiefs, being that I'm a Chief's 
aide. 

Left the vehicle. I guess within a minute on 
scene, I left that location, took my bag of supplies 
that I had with me, some extra batteries and supplies, 
being that I figured we would be there for a long time, 
proceeded down Vesey Street towards the West Side 
Highway. Got to 7 World Trade Center. 

I saw another EMS triage location with 
Captain Nahmod and Chief Peruggia were treating 
patients and I guess a little bit after I got past that 



T. J. BENDICK 

point, there was a loud roar. This is probably I would 
say about 5 minutes after I got on the scene, maybe a 
little bit longer. 

I figured another plane was coming. I 
stopped for a second, looked around and I didn't see 
anything and then I began to run towards the West Side 
Highway, where I saw MERV 1, figuring to get as far 
away from buildings, not knowing what was going on. I 
got to the corner of 140 West, where the New York 
Telephone Company building was, saw a little -- like a 
little indent into the building. It was a construction 
barrier or wall that was built. 

I went behind the wall I guess with another 
Firefighter, Police Captain and a couple of civilians. 
We put our backs against the wall because of not 
knowing what the heck was going on. Then in a couple 
of seconds, the roar stopped and I guess like in a 
split second it was just pure black. 

After it got dark, one gentleman said is 
everybody all right. I think everybody that was 
standing there was like yes, I'm fine. I think the 
same gentleman who was doing most of the talking, he 
asked a guy out loud who was talking to himself, he 
goes do we stay here or do we leave. 



T. J. BENDICK 

At the same time you hear everybody start 
coughing and choking on all the dirt and the fumes and 
the smoke, so immediately you knew there was no chance 
of staying there, so one guy is like well, we got to 
get out of here. Like I said, out loud everybody is 
basically thinking to themselves. One guy says, well, 
I think there is ambulances and fire trucks behind us 
going towards the highway. Then he said does anybody 
have a flashlight? 

So I reached down in my belt and I actually 
had a small flashlight with me. I took my small 
flashlight out and turned that on and the guy that was 
talking, grabbed my hand immediately, because I guess 
he was standing right next to me and then we waved the 
flashlight around asking if there was anybody else near 
us. You could hear a couple of voices near us, but 
most of them said they couldn't see the flashlight, 
even though they sounded like they were about 2 feet 
from you. 

So eventually, I think about 2 more people we 
were able to get and we all held hands. Then a couple 
of other people were able to work their way over and 
then grabbed on to us. So it was about I guess 5 or 6 
of us, we all held hands and we used the one flashlight 



T. J. BENDICK 

and we started walking towards the West Side Highway. 

Like I said, we had an idea which way to go. 
You could kind of hear the diesel engine from one of 
the fire trucks, so like I said, we were hoping that 
was the West Side Highway. Like I said, the visibility 
was, I guess with the flashlight, about a foot. 
Without the flashlight it was zero. 

Meanwhile you couldn't breathe, so at that 
point I was using my turnout coat and my shirt, put 
that over my face, trying to filter the air out. It 
wasn't like it was smoke. It was just dirt. It was 
like breathing dirt. So trying to just keep the dirt 
out of your mouth so you can get some form of air. 

I remember not being able to see. I remember 
walking, hitting the curb, going by the guy who was in 
front of me, who was holding my hand with the 
flashlight. He tripped off the sidewalk and I held him 
and he said, you know, we said everybody watch out. 
There is a sidewalk, so I remember stepping off the 
sidewalk. You couldn't see your feet. You could just 
feel it. I can remember stepping over several fire 
hoses. Once again you couldn't see them. You could 
just feel them. 

We found the fire truck we heard. We walked 



T. J. BENDICK 

along the fire truck. We were holding the fire truck, 
feeling it. Got past the fire truck and there was more 
like open space, so we just kept walking up in the open 
space, heading north, trying to -- we couldn't run, you 
just had to go slow because you couldn't see. 

I guess we got about -- I think about Murray 
Street, I would say. It would have had to been by the 
time we got to fresh air, because I remember the 
college. So we got someplace around the college where 
the fresh air started and I think in the middle of West 
and Murray, there was a Citywide ambulance parked with 
its passenger door open. I guess they had been and 
gone. 

So I climbed in that ambulance, climbed in 
the back of their ambulance because it was a van. You 
can climb through. I got their saline out of the back, 
because my eyes and everything, my mouth were full of 
garbage. So I got out of the ambulance from the side 
door, and I washed my eyes out, washed my mouth out, 
trying to get as much of the dirt out of me. The other 
gentleman with us, once we got to free air, they all 
scattered and went to wherever they had to go. 

After I washed my eyes out, I went back to I 
guess about the south point of the college on Murray. 



T. J. BENDICK 

There I met up with Captain Nahmod, who was at 7 World 
Trade Center. He got out. He was by himself and 2 
FDNY EMS physicians came by. They had some of the dust 
masks, so one of them gave me a dust mask. I honestly 
don't know who they were. They were Fire Department 
members. So I got a dust mask, because it was still 
kind of dusty where we were standing. 

At that point, they were trying to get an 
idea of what was going on, get a plan together. At 
that same point, I was looking around and I saw -- 
numerous civilians were asking are you all right, do 
you need anything. At that point, some place on the 
west side, on the West Side Highway, a cop had opened a 
fire hydrant and he had the hydrant going and everybody 
was like washing their face off, so then I went over 
there to wash off. I was letting the water go through 
my mouth and the cop is saying the water is dirty, what 
are you doing opening your mouth. I said at this point 
it doesn't really make a difference clearing what's in 
my mouth. 

So I washed off again, because there was just 
so much stuff on you. Then I met up with Lieutenant 
Albuerme from Battalion 8, who now got on. I don't 
know where he came from, but he ended up on the same 



T. J. BENDICK 

point, right around the college. So myself, Joe 
Cahill, a bunch of us met up, so we all started talking 
to get an idea together of what we wanted to do. 

Right about that point, we were looking 
southbound and we were all standing like in a group 
huddled. We were saying okay, if people come out, you 
know, I guess we will get them, put them to the side, 
and sometime around there you saw that the north tower 
collapsed. That I actually -- the south tower I never 
saw collapse, didn't know it collapsed. All I could 
see was a large cloud. 

At that point I could actually visually see 
the top floors of the north tower starting to give way 
and that began to collapse. At that point we all began 
to run north. 

Q. Where were you at this point? 

A. We had to be right at the same area, about 
West and Murray, because this is the -- where is the 
College of Manhattan College? 

Q. This is it, I believe. That's not it. It's 
further up. 

A. So we were further up at that point. 

Q. It's right past Chambers, so you must have 
been like right around here. 



10 

T. J. BENDICK 



A. Okay. So we had to be around Chambers, 
because we were at the south side of Manhattan 
Community College when the second building collapsed. 
So we actually may have walked even further then, 
because I remember we got to about Manhattan Community 
College. The other thing I should note, the pedestrian 
bridge there, which I think is all in the same area, 
and that's where we met up with everybody. 

At that point, we ran north alongside of the 
college, because I was on the sidewalk right next to 
the college, going north and between the college there 
is a walkway, actually a road that goes under the 
college, so we ran in underneath there, so the college 
building is against our backs and then when the debris 
came, it would go past us, not necessarily striking 
us. The only thing we worried about was anything 
coming down on top of us. 

At the same point, a plain clothes, which I 
assume was a police officer, fired three rounds of his 
revolver into the door of the Manhattan Community 
College, the glass doors, which caused a panic. 
Everybody was screaming shots fired, get down. 

I actually visually saw the guy fire the 3 
shots. He wasn't in a uniform. He was in plain 



11 

T. J. BENDICK 



clothes. I was actually screaming, no, calm down, he 
is shooting the door out because like I say, he just 
caused a huge panic, because now, obviously everybody 
knows it's a terrorist attack, and this guy is shooting 
his gun off. So he blew the doors out to the college, 
because they were glass doors. He climbed in, called 
people, try to get to safety. 

At that point, I looked back, right before I 
made the turn, and it looked like most of the dust. It 
wasn't coming that far, so I wasn't too concerned about 
the actual building, so we stopped for a minute, 
relaxed, and walked back out on to the highway, and 
then said, okay, we need to set up another triage, 
figure something out. By the same people, Joe Cahill, 
Lieutenant Bearman and myself, some other people, I 
don't know who they were, all met up at the north 
corner of the college and we were trying to figure out 
how to get into the college to set up the triage and 
just get people off the street. 

Joe Cahill made arrangements with some staff 
person at the college to get the gym open, which was on 
the second floor, but had an access stairwell from 
outside the building. So we went up into the gym, 
which they got open. We laid -- there's mats. We laid 



12 
T. J. BENDICK 



down mats. Brought some supplies in from the ambulance 
that was sitting on the street. 

Don't ask me the number, it was an ALS 
ambulance. We got into the back door. Took their 
supplies out. Put those inside. Figured we will take 
members, police or whoever was like, you know, couldn't 
move, but you know, wasn't in need to go to the 
hospital, we just let them sit in there and take a 
break. 

After we got that set up, we figured we will 
shuffle people up, MERV 4 was parked in the street 
right outside the door, so they were taking anybody 
that was truly hurt. They were looking at -- there was 
numerous ambulances on the West Side Highway. 
Basically like I said, everybody was just trying to see 
what they could do. 

At the same point, one of the Lieutenants 
said, I don't know his name, said get everybody to take 
their coats and their gear off, because we don't know 
what's --if they are contaminated with anything, 
before they go into the building. 

So at that point, I went over to one of the 
fire Chiefs on the West Side Highway, where there was a 
fire truck parked. There was no firemen except for two 



13 
T. J. BENDICK 



injured firemen and this injured Chief, we were 
thinking of taking supplies off the truck, possibly 
hook up a hydrant to get decon going. The Chief said 
take whatever you want. 

So it looked like a probationary firefighter 
who was off duty, because he was clean, he just like -- 
he had just shown up and a plainclothes cop and myself 
took a fire hose, hooked up to the fire hydrant right 
in front of the Community College, about a hundred feet 
from this intersection, and we put the hose to the 
corner, figuring as people come out at the 
intersection, we will wash them down, throw them in the 
gym, and let them get -- you know, take a break. 

I don't know what time frame that was, or how 
long it took us to get all that accomplished, but it 
took a time. By that point, we set all that up, the 
gym was open, we had the whole plan, put everybody in 
the gym, wash them down, and if there was injured, the 
MERV was there. 

So it seemed kind of organized, and it had an 
action plan, and sometime around there, we could hear 
on the Citywide radio that they were sending the rest 
of the units in to Chelsea Piers for north staging. I 
don't think they even knew we were there, because the 



14 
T. J. BENDICK 



radio was just too tied up to even try to tell them 
where we were. 

So we just figured, you know, we are 
together, we will stay together, the people we had, 
treat them, there was ambulances there. Just throw 
them in the ambulances and get them out. We need to 
get people out. I guess all the responding units were 
going to Chelsea Piers, but we figured it was too far 
away to try to bring patients, because, I mean, it ' s a 
drive. So we figured if anybody -- if we needed to go 
there, we could go there, but we figured we still 
needed to treat people where we were. 

Sometime around the same point they ended up 
calling, the Lieutenants came out to everybody and said 
we are evacuating, drop whatever you got, grab our 
supplies. We are getting out, because the Stuyvesant 
school they were feared was going to explode and there 
were reports of gas leaks and additional devices. 

So about the same point we dropped all of our 
equipment, some of the EMTs and Lieutenants took the 
supplies that we had in the building out, threw them in 
the back of some of the ambulances, and sometime around 
that point, we were just like, okay, let's just get 
out . 



15 
T. J. BENDICK 



At that point I was tired and I was like 
okay, I'm getting out. Got in the back of one 
ambulance that had the windows blown out, but the crew 
was in the front, so they start driving, so they opened 
the back doors and we stood in the back and there was 
all the other people on the street. We piled them all 
in the back of the ambulance and we drove up to Chelsea 
Piers. I remember, I think it was Pelham Manor Fire 
Department we threw in the back. A couple of cops, a 
couple of EMTs, I think St. Claire's EMTs . We had 
about 20 people in the back I wouldn't doubt it. We 
just drove up to Chelsea Piers. 

At that point, that's like, we just gave up 
on what we were doing and we just headed to Chelsea 
Piers and then, you know, everybody regrouped, found 
who they were working with. Looked like most of the 
guys who were by themselves, they lost their partners, 
teamed up with somebody else and about that point they 
were setting up the hospital at Chelsea Piers. Some of 
the guys that were by themselves, I noticed went over 
to the hospital and were working out of the field 
hospital, big help. But I didn't see any patients go 
up there, except for that one Firefighter. I sat there 
for the rest of the night. 



16 
T. J. BENDICK 



Then the Lieutenant said I'm going back to 
the station. You got a vehicle? I said okay, I'll 
come with you. It had to be sometime, I guess, around 
6:00. Like I said, I can't tell you how long it took 
to accomplish the tasks. I didn't notice the watch. I 
was on the north side of the north tower at 6 World 
Trade Center when the south tower collapsed. Got out 
of that, grouped, the north tower collapsed, got out of 
that, went to the college, tried to set up and that's 
when they said they blew up the school and there might 
be additional explosions and they said evacuate the 
downtown area and then I went up to Chelsea Piers. 

I don't think I missed any, but that's about 
it. 

Q. Is there anything else you would like to add 
to this? Anything at all? 

A. I don't think so. Obviously as you know, 
there was a lot going on. Lots of people moving 
around. Obviously there was numerous firefighters and 
everybody was coming south. We were all trying to find 
a safe distance to triage and do our work, but they 
didn't tell you what was safe at that point. 

MR. ECCLESTON: Right. Okay. The time is 8 

o'clock, this concludes our interview with Thomas 



17 



T. J. BENDICK 



Bendick. 



File No. 9110085 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

PARAMEDIC JOSEPH CAHILL 

Interview Date: October 15, 2001 



Transcribed by Elisabeth F. Nason 



J. CAHILL 

MR. ECCLESTON: Today's date is October 15, 

20Q1. The time is 1217 hours. I'm Christopher 

Eccleston of the New York City Fire Department. 

I'm conducting an interview with the following 

individual. 

Q. Please state your name, rank, title and 
assigned command area of the Fire Department of the 
City of New York regarding the events of September 11, 
2001. 

A. Okay. My name is Joseph Cahill. I'm a 
Paramedic. My office title is Citywide advance life 
support coordinator and I work in the office of EMS 
operations . 

Q. Also present is? 

A. Christine Bastedenbeck of the New York City 
Fire Department. 

Q. Joe, can you tell me about the events of 
September 11, 2001? 

A. Okay. Well, I was running late. So I was on 
an odd train, which means that when things started, I 
was actually in the train in New Jersey. I heard one 
of the other passengers yell out holy fuck. And I 
looked out the window. One of the twin towers was 
visibly on fire. You could see the red of the smoke or 



J. CAHILL 

the red through the smoke from the side of the 
building . 

We got to Hoboken station. Naturally the 
PATH train to World Trade Center was closed. World 
Trade Center is the only stop on that -- New York stop 
on that train. So I took the 33 Street train to 
Christopher Street with the intention of walking into 
the scene, which is essentially what I did. I walked 
in about halfway down. A postal employee gave me a 
ride in his postal truck. He gave me a ride to, I 
guess it must be Vesey Street. 

He dropped me off, drove me down whatever 
street this is. I don't know what that is. 

Q. I think that's -- 

A. But I remember coming down through here and I 
don't know, maybe he drove me down -- 

Q. West Street? 

A. Yes, I think he might have. Because I 
remember coming straight down. I don't remember making 
this zigzag, coming straight -- yes, and ending up 
here. He let me out on the zebra stripes over here. 
My original thought was to go to OEM, because I 
routinely work OEM for the Chief during other 
emergencies, but I figured I would find out what was 



J. CAHILL 

going on a little more first. 

Let's see. At that point I remember seeing 
--it was a proprietary ambulance. I don't believe it 
was part of the 911 contract there. Asked them if they 
knew where the command center was. They kind of 
shrugged, threw some equipment over their shoulders and 
we both walked up to Church Street, where there seemed 
to be a couple of other units there. 

I spoke to them briefly. I think there was 
an officer there but I don't remember who. That looked 
like it was under control. So I walked back down 
Vesey. I remember seeing Frank Larkin from the Secret 
Service run by at a dead run. That just stuck in my 
head . 

I got all the way down to Vesey and West Side 
Drive and I ran into Chief Villani. Talked to him 
briefly. I looked around, down here, adjacent to the 
Trade Center, there seemed to be a lot of vehicles, 
ambulances and fire trucks, up the West Side Highway. 
There was also a lot of vehicles with more coming in. 

I told Chief Villani listen, it doesn't look 
like there is anyone staging. I will walk up there and 
start organizing that, but I don't have a radio because 
I came in on foot. He said okay. I don't remember if 



J. CAHILL 

it was then or when I got up here further that I ran 
into Pinky. I don't know Pinky 's last, real name. He 
is a Lieutenant at Bellevue. A little Spanish guy. I 
don't know his last name. I think it might have been 
at this point, because I couldn't have gotten much past 
Barclay when the first building collapsed. 

From where I was standing, wherever that was, 
it was definitely south across here somewhere. There 
is a pedestrian walk, but it was definitely right below 
this pedestrian walkway. From where I stood, Chief 
Villani had said --he pointed out one of these 
buildings. I can't, without being there and looking at 
it, I'm not sure which one of these it is around the 
Winter Garden. 

But he said the command post is over there. 
If you need anything come over here. I said you know, 
I told him about the radio thing. I got about here, 
which is where we started to put staging together, when 
one of the towers collapsed and it looked for all the 
world like it collapsed right on where he indicated the 
command center to be. 

I don't remember who told me before the 
collapse, but it might have been Chief Villani. It 
might have been somebody else, told me that Chief 



J. CAHILL 

Goldfarb was in the command post. At that point 
truthfully, Pinky and I, because sometime shortly after 
that we hooked up, or shortly before that. At that 
point I thought Pinky was probably the highest ranking 
guy still alive on the scene. 

We proceeded up above the walkway, started to 
organize a staging area there the second time and then 
the second building collapsed, drove us from that 
position up further. Is this College of Insurance? Do 
you know which one of these is Stuyvesant? 

Q. Yes, it's up here. 

A. So when we were driven out the second time -- 
so maybe there is another walkway up here. 

Q. Yes, there is -- 

A. Then it's not this walkway. It's this 
walkway. 

Q. Pedestrian walkway? Where you were talking 
about when the first building came down you were by the 
pedestrian walkway. 

A. I was between these two walkways. 

Q. Just south of Chambers? 

A. Yes, I think so. Chambers, Warren, something 
like that. 

Q. This map could have been better if it was 



J. CAHILL 

extended more. 

A. When we got driven out by the second 
collapse, we went up and I remember we started setting 
up right next to Stuyvesant High School. Then we got 
the word that there was a gas leak in there and that we 
had to evacuate that area. We were driven back further 
up. But that was later on. 

I remember talking to an ass load of Hatzolah 
guys. They must have had 6 units on the scene. There 
was a bunch of our units. Before the first collapse, 
yes, I must have been up here. Because before the 
first collapse I had made it just about to where the 
vehicles started, where we were starting to organize 
staging. I remember seeing George Burbano from 
Battalion 22. 

Q. 22? 

A. He was off duty, so I gave him my work sweat 
shirt, so he had something so the cops wouldn't try to 
eject him from the scene. I remember he was helping me 
move vehicles. I remember running from both collapses 
with him, both of the tower collapses. Then I saw -- I 
don't remember whose shield numbers these are. I 
remember I saw Rich, not Rich, Mitch Berkowitz, who was 
also off duty. I don't know if he is light duty or off 



J. CAHILL 

duty. I remember all he was wearing was his medic blue 
shirt, dark blue shirt and a pair of jeans, which might 
have mean that's what he grabbed out of the car when he 
jumped out on his way to the station or might have 
meant he was doing retrieval while his wrist healed 
up. I don't know. 

I remember collecting these two shield 
numbers for some reason, of people that were there. 

Q. That would be 1172? 

A. 74. 

Q. 74, sorry, 1174 and 3871? 

A. 3871. I had given these shield numbers to 
one of the new Captains, Debbie Monte, a week or so 
afterward, because she was riding the desk here that 
was keeping track of the list. 

So anyway, once we got beaten out of the 
position for a third time, we got from the gas leak, 
actually before that. When we were beaten out by the 
second collapse, I went into the Borough of Manhattan 
Community College, looked for a phone. I finally found 
one in the security office. I called my office 
downstairs. I asked them to -- I asked Mery Bento, who 
is one of the secretaries down there, to page out the 
Division ALS coordinators. The first one she could get 



J. CAHILL 

a hold of was to take a vehicle, drive to the pharmacy, 
find a pharmacist, get 10 cases of everything, get 20 
cases of asthma meds and -- I think I ended up with 20 
cases of everything, 50 cases of asthma meds and eye 
drops, because it looked like we were going to be dug 
in for a long time. 

There must have been a significant period of 
time between the second tower collapse and when we got 
beat out of the position by the gas leak. I don't 
think the gas leak is on there. We got beat out of 
position by the gas leak, because we had started to set 
up a walking wounded treatment, a holding area in the 
gym of Borough of Manhattan Community College. The 
reason I say that we must have -- must have been some 
amount of time, we started seeing patients in that time 
period . 

There was -- I don't know who owns it 
-- there was some kind of blood mobile. No, you know 
what it was, it was one of those blood pressure 
screening vans, but it was a respectable size RV. We 
set that up as a MERV at one point. They had a PAA. 
We put -- I think we used a crew from Hatzolah and 
Tommy Carlstrom, I think we put in there, to kind of 
interface everything and make sure everything stayed on 



10 

J. CAHILL 



an even keel. 

Hatzolah had a huge amount of equipment 
there, because they were in their private vehicles. So 
we grabbed a couple of their guys and a full set of 
equipment and threw it in there. I don't think we ever 
got to use it though. We started seeing a lot of 
patients with crap in their eyes, a lot of patients 
with inhaled stuff and that's the only reason I knew we 
needed to get those -- bulk up on those specific two 
things of medication. 

I also called Jimmy Geraci, who apparently 
had seen either the real life version or on TV on 
radio, was starting to crank up his guys, get his 
disaster trucks on the road. I gave him a heads up 
that what we are going to be needing a lot of is eye 
wash, eye flush, stuff like that. I don't know 
whatever happened to those trucks because right after I 
had that conversation with him, we got moved out 
because of the gas leak. My understanding is they 
finally got to the scene at some other point. Where we 
were north of the job, it never came there. I 
understand they got to the south part somehow. 

After the gas leak we went further north. I 
don't remember how much further north. I could point 



11 

J. CAHILL 



the building out on the scene. On the scene, if you 
are looking northward, Borough of Manhattan Community 
College is a brick building on the right-hand side. It 
has got a little underpass to let one of the roads 
through. That line of route continues up another block 
or a building or two without appreciably getting 
higher . 

The next really tall building is where we 
tried to reform again. It's got something to do with 
the phone company. It's an AT&T office building, 
something like that. I don't remember. It would be 
relatively easy to point out on the scene. We stopped 
there, started getting under control again and 
somewhere in that point, I started to walk down and 
chase straggling vehicles, and head personnel up. I 
ran into Chief Hirth, Lieutenant Cacciola, Grace. 

Q. Grace? 

A. And Mark Stone, who looked pretty worse for 
wear. Essentially they told me at that point that we 
were going to start rallying up at 23 Street at the 
piers. We were going to start putting together a thing 
up there. I said okay. I'm going to come down a 
little bit and start chasing stragglers up so that they 
aren't wandering around down here with no direction. 



12 
J. CAHILL 



At that point I saw Jimmy Schrang. I started 
talking to him. My absolute favorite story of this 
whole thing. Jimmy Schrang goes, you know, my friends 
from Bosnia called me today to see if I was okay. 

Anyway we took one of these cross streets. 
It's probably like Warren or Murray, because we didn't 
have to cut through any of these buildings. We didn't 
have to zig around any of these buildings. We came 
over here. Every once in a while we would run into 
somebody. We would send them up to Chelsea Piers. 

Then we got -- I kind of imagine it was over 
here somewhere. No, because we couldn't see City Hall, 
so it must have been on Church Street somewhere. It's 
Church or whatever there, West Street. We started 
working our way down. Somewhere in here Jimmy saw a 
guy over here. I saw a guy over here in uniform. He 
said I will go back to talk to him, I will go over and 
talk to him. I will meet you back here in a minute. 

I went over here to talk to him and found 
that "him" was the furthest outlier of a big treatment 
sector that was here. I don't remember if it was 
here. I don't think it was up here. I don't remember 
seeing St. Paul's. I don't know how -- maybe it was 
further up this way. I do remember that this side of 



13 
J. CAHILL 



the block had a small -- 

Q. This side of Church? 

A. Yes, the west side of Church had a -- some 
kind of courtyard, like a building courtyard that was 
securely fenced off, because I remember seeing cops 
climbing over the fence, but it had trees, little 
trees. Not great big jongando trees, but little 
trees . 

Anyway, I ran into a treatment sector here. 
Lieutenant Piatt was in charge, Ed Piatt. He and I 
talked for a little while. There was a lot of units 
there. There was maybe 4 or 5 FDNY units. There was 
two units from Jersey City, at least. There was a 
couple of commercial ambulances there. There were a 
couple of voluntary ambulances there. What was also 
there was a suspicious package on one of these side 
streets . 

So I told him that, you know, the direction 
that we had gotten was to fall back to 23 Street and 
Chelsea Piers, at which point he said well, who gave 
you that direction. The truth of the matter is that 
Chief Hirth didn't say Joe, go get everybody and make 
everybody fall back. So I really didn't have a good 
answer for him. So he had a radio, so he was able to 



14 
J. CAHILL 



actually reach Chief Peruggia, who at least temporarily 
told to us hold position there. 

We organized these guys. I started working 
essentially as a staging officer. I walked down the 
row of ambulances that were probably scattered around 
over here, who's on your crew, what's your unit, where 
do you work from. What vehicle you got. Be ready to 
move in 10 minutes because we may end up bugging out. 
A short while later we were given the order to fall 
back, but not to Chelsea Piers, to Greenwich and 
something. Greenwich and something. No, it was -- I 
never got south of the Battery Tunnel over the 
entrance. That was only way way later. That was like 
6:00 the next morning. It was Greenwich and 
something. I don't know. Oh, you know what, it was 
right in front of the Travelers Insurance building 
because we used the umbrella as a marker. This two 
story umbrella logo thing. 

So at some point in my walking down there and 
starting to do the staging and writing down the units, 
a fellow walks up named Harold Watkins, and says yo. 
He is in a polo shirt, one of our uniform polo shirts 
and uniform pants and shoes and looks well, just kind 
of bewildered, but looks like he is in uniform and 



15 
J. CAHILL 



ready to go. I said hey, how you doing. Who are you. 
He said oh, my name is Harold Watkins, I'm a fire cadet 
and I work at the Fire Museum on my off --as well. 

I saw this all going on so I thought I would 
come and lend a hand. So Harold and I went around and 
did all this interviewing. When the order came to 
move, actually John Clair came through there as well 
while we were there. But I don't know. Time really 
didn't have that much relevance to me. There were no 
patients under my care so there was no time vitals, 
none of that stuff. We were just there for the 
duration of the job. So time really didn't mean much 
to me. 

At some point we started to bug out. Some of 
the vehicles had trouble. One of them had burst a 
radiator hose or had a leaky radiator hose, so we 
started to organize getting a couple of vehicles jump 
started. John Clair had Joe Fell from the State with 
him. 

Q. (inaudible)? 

A. Yes, just as I remember stuff. We pulled out 
of there. We had to jump start two or three vehicles. 
One vehicle had, like I said, a leaking hose so we put 
them further up in the line and said, you know, if you 



16 
J. CAHILL 



can't make it any further, pull on to the sidewalk out 
of the way. We told all the vehicles behind them if 
you see them pull out on the sidewalk out of the way, 
you need to stop and pick them up, you know. 

The reason we were given for why we were 
moving was that 7 World Trade Center was going to 
collapse or was at risk of collapsing. So we must have 
been somewhere in this area where we would have had a 
problem with that. But I honestly don't remember. It 
all looks -- I'm fairly familiar with this, actually 
this, from West Side Highway east almost to the river 
or certainly past City Hall from Liberty or not even -- 
from the Battery Tunnel opening north to Vesey, I'm 
fairly familiar with because I have travelled through 
there commuting a lot. 

I drove through there the day after, the 
morning of the 12th and I didn't recognize most of the 
places I was. It all looked very different. It all 
looked like those videos you see of Pongo Pongo, a 
little island in the South Pacific has had a volcanic 
eruption and all the ash is falling out of the air. It 
was just -- I don't know exactly where we were. 

We must have been up in this area somewhere. 
I know there was a physician's group -- would have been 



17 
J. CAHILL 



on the north, or the south of one of these streets. 

Q. Like Warren, Murray? 

A. Something like that. We had to have been in 
that range because -- 

Q. On this street? 

A. Yes, because they were worried about us. 
They wanted us to move the treatment sector because of 
7 World Trade Center was imminently to collapse, which, 
of course, it did. In fact it did while we were 
moving . 

So this guy Harold Watkins and I, not having 
a vehicle, everybody else was moving out, I told Ed, 
you know what, we will start walking back up and we 
will meet you there. There was a volunteer unit and I 
don't remember from where, that was parked on the -- 
would have been the west part of the intersection. It 
was an odd shaped intersection too, in that it was 
almost like-- it was a triangular intersection where 
there was two roads coming north-south that came 
together, joined -- I wonder if we weren't here. I 
don't think so. We might have been here up by like 
West Broadway, because -- yes, you know what, I think 
we were on Broadway. We would have been right in here 
between Broadway and West, like around Murray or Park. 



18 
J. CAHILL 



The police had one of these eastern cross streets 
blocked off, like I said, with the suspicious package, 
which looked like a suitcase or an old fashioned 
briefcase. 

So Watkins and I walked back up and met the 
rest of the group at Greenwich, at the Travelers 
building. Got to chasing a few stragglers up. The 
rest of the group set up there. I don't know what 
happened to Piatt. I didn't see him again. I don't 
remember where he ended up. I did see when I got to 
the Travelers building, which maybe that wasn't where 
we were originally headed. Maybe that isn't Greenwich 
and something. Maybe they ended up setting up another 
treatment sector somewhere else. 

When we got to the Travelers building, there 
was a huge amount of units. There must have been 20, 
25 units there. But there was an enormous amount of 
people. There was a queue of like 3,000 people waiting 
to help. There was some enormous firefighter. I don't 
know if he was our Firefighter or from somewhere else. 
The bunker gear, he didn't have the jacket so you 
couldn't really tell, but his bunker gear didn't look 
like ours. I don't remember why. It was the wrong 
color or the wrong something. His job was essentially 



19 
J. CAHILL 



to organize the volunteers. 

What he did was he organized them. They were 
moved over here. They had a little briefing. Then 
they moved them over here. Then they had another 
little briefing. Then they moved them over here. They 
essentially just paraded them around this section, 
because there wasn't anything for them to do, because 
they couldn't send them into the unsafe zone, but there 
was huge amounts of people. 

So again, I remember seeing there, I remember 
seeing Tommy from Bellevue. What the hell was his 
name. Used to be Chief Pascale's aide when I was their 
Division coordinator. I will think of it . I can 
picture him. Eppinger, was there. There were at least 
two other Lieutenants there. So I slipped into the 
familiar -- now familiar role of staging officer and 
Harold Watkins and I walked around to all the units, 
who are you? Where are you from? What are your shield 
numbers? You know. All right, take a roll of 2 inch 
tape. What's your normal 911 designation, good. Put 
that on the windshield. Don't have one? Okay, you are 
now Jersey City one. You are Jersey City two. We 
labeled all the windshields with who they were. We 
stayed there for a while. Again I don't really know, 



20 
J. CAHILL 



time was really kind of meaningless. I know we had at 
least one command car there. One of the supervisors 
had a car, because we were storing some stuff in it. 
Now my briefcase ended up in Pinky 's car real early 
on . 

So we didn't see a whole lot of patients 
there. I don't think we saw any patients there. 
Sometime during the day a guy in what looked like -- he 
was in battle dress fatigues, he looked like he was 
from the National Guard, but I don't know. David 
something. Came up, said hey, you know, we got a 
hospital over in the Borough of Manhattan Community 
College and we got no transport resources. So the 
supervisors and I and him talked about that for a 
minute. 

I got the assignment to walk down there with 
him, see what was going on down there, because as far 
as we knew at that point, at least in that location, by 
Travelers, we had abandoned the location in BMCC. Went 
back there and there was in fact a really big operation 
cranking up there, between Port Authority and I don't 
even know where they were from. 

An emergency room physician had brought like 
a bunch of his staff and the Red Cross was helping out 



21 
J. CAHILL 



and they were unloading truck loads of shit into this 
place. Stretchers, you know, little folding stretchers 
the Red Cross had, blankets, medicines, not a lot of 
medicines, like a lot of eye wash and aspirin and stuff 
like that. The Port Authority occupied another piece 
of it and they were bringing in all kinds of stuff. 
Brought cases of rubber boots, work gloves, 
flashlights, all kinds of stuff like that. 

What essentially -- I came in agreement with 
the doctor that was running there is that, you know 
what, as long as the Port Authority will let us park, 
because they were controlling that block. As long as 
they will let us park there, we will keep an ALS and a 
BLS there. You use them? Send somebody up to us. Let 
us know where they are going and we will send you 
another bus. 

That's where we kept it. We had a lot of 
problems with parking and stuff, moving around. That's 
where we kept it. I don't think they transported maybe 
a handful of patients. They saw a huge amount of 
patients, flushed their eyes and stuff. I know a bunch 
of the Port Authority guys went out to the pharmacies 
and brought stuff back. 

After that, a couple of different times, I 



22 
J. CAHILL 



went back and forth between those two locations, 
Travelers and BMCC, but I don't think they really saw a 
whole lot of patients. They ended up setting up food 
there, so they probably saw a whole lot of EMS people. 
What? 

Sometime later on, I don't even remember how 
much later, I walked down to Chambers, which is what, 
this one, to the command post at Chambers and west 
side, and I saw Chief McCracken, talked to some of the 
other people there. Saw Lieutenant Cronin, and saw 
John Clair and was given the direction to start 
organizing, breaking down the BMCC hospital, because no 
one was aware that BMCC was there. They had already 
set up another hospital in Stuyvesant, which they are 
literally 3 blocks apart. 

So I went back, talked to the doc, I said 
listen, you know, there is another hospital right down 
the block. They are going to catch all the patients 
because they are closer to the scene. What we would 
like to do is split up your materials and your 
personnel, send some up it up to the pier and some of 
it down to this other hospital. It's a more effective 
way of doing it . 

He was very amenable to that. What that 



23 
J. CAHILL 



ended up meaning is we split up his personnel from the 
equipment, took all the equipment that they didn't want 
to -- stuff they wanted to take, I mean, obviously was 
theirs. But then I think they only took the expensive 
equipment that they had personally brought. 

We moved everything else down to Stuyvesant, 
which we used I guess a couple of busses from -- I want 
to say Metro Care, but I'm not sure if that's right. 
It was definitely one of the big commercials. They had 
25 units lined up on the West Side Highway at that 
time. Like 18 of them ALS. Some of them from as far 
away as Connecticut. We used 2 or 3 of them, and there 
was a van there, a regular passenger van from the 
academy with a driver. I don't know that guy's name, 
but we used those three vehicles to move the stuff down 
into Stuyvesant. Put stuff in Stuyvesant. 

At sometime during this, the Division 6 ALS 
coordinator, Al Suriel, arrived with a truck full of 
pharmaceuticals from our pharmacy. Had to be early on, 
because I remember bringing some of them up to Borough 
of Manhattan Community College and trading them for 
stuff we need. Truthfully, my whole day from that 
point on essentially doing what I do best, take a 
little stuff from over here, give it to this guy over 



24 
J. CAHILL 



here. Oh, what, you have extra, good, take that from 
over here, bring that over there. Take some stuff 
extra from over here, bring it back to the first place. 
Q. Bargaining? 

A. Yes, and just, unfortunately, the whole thing 
-- well, what we obviously didn't know at the time, 
but unfortunately the whole thing was, you know, when 
you work the marathon in one of the tents, what happens 
is that like about two and a half hours in, everybody 
starts getting really antsy and if you don't stay on 
top of controlling the tent, what you end up with is 
400 sets of IV fluids set up around the tent and that's 
exactly what was going on. 

People were starting to get antsy to see 
patients. There was no one to see. I think a lot of 
movement of equipment was probably unnecessary, but 
kept people out of trouble too, which is okay. They 
did see -- I know Stuyvesant and BMCC saw a large 
amount of crap in the eyes, crap in the lungs. Got a 
boo-boo. Doesn't need a stitch, no, good, I'm back to 
work kind of thing. 

So that's pretty much what I did the rest of 
the night. Al Suriel had a MUP student with him, 
because he was at refresher when he got paged. Her 



25 
J. CAHILL 



first name was Ronnie, I don't know what her last name 
is. 

Q. Were they there prior to the collapse or 
after the collapse? 

A. Probably not, probably not. 

Q. We are mainly interested in people that were 
there prior. 

A. Then we are done. I'm already into the 
evening at this point. 

Q. Anything else you would like to add? 
Comments, feelings. 

A. No, I think that probably the biggest 
impression I got out of this whole thing was this is 
probably as close to being in an infantry unit that 
gets overrun. We are scattered everywhere. Nobody 
knew where anybody was. Nobody knew who was in 
charge. It really felt for a moment that I was in 
Apocalypse Now, where Martin Sheen goes, where is your 
CO? Ain't that you? No. Uh-oh. 

Let's pause for a second. 

MR. ECCLESTON: Pausing the tape at 12:50. 

(Pause) 

MR. ECCLESTON: This interview is being 

restarted again at 1:10. 



26 
J. CAHILL 



Q. Can you please continue with the events. 
A. Yes, I mean I think where we left off was 
essentially recounting what happened the rest of my 
night, which was at different points shortages would 
show up in the Stuyvesant hospital. They need more 
fluid, I would find fluid for them. They need more eye 
drops, I would find eye drops for them. I remember we 
moved the multi-lator and the big M tank from the van 
at the bureau of training center, brought it inside, 
set it up, treat asthma. We made a little asthma booth 
out . 

After that, there was a whole bunch of false 
starts where BOT were going to take people back and 
eventually Al Suriel and Ronnie went back with them to 
BOT because they were both in refresher and MUP class 
respectively. 

I took over control of the pharmacy truck. I 
went to the command center and essentially stood by 
there for direction, because -- I hung out in the MERV 
for a while. All this stuff, it was already dark by 
this time. It was already early the next morning. 

Then at the end of the day I walked back up 
to Christopher Street and another postal employee gave 
me a lift . 



27 
J. CAHILL 



Q. Back to the train? 

A. Back to the train. I took the train home. 

Q. Is there anything else you would like to add 
to this in regard to the events that happened prior to 
12 noon? 

A. You know what, I have been over it because 
I'm sure everybody else has as well. I have been over 
it in my head a great deal since then. I can't think 
of anything we could have significantly done better, 
but truthfully, the section I was in up on West Side 
Drive certainly north of Chambers for most of the day 
was not where the action was. It really wasn't where, 
you know, it wasn't where command post got collapsed on 
or treatment sectors got collapsed on. It certainly 
wasn't where I expect any of the missing, our missing, 
EMS missing people, would be from. 
So I don't know. 
MR. ECCLESTON: Okay. Thank you very much 

for conducting this interview with me. This 

interview is being concluded at 113 hours. 



File No. 9110086 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
LIEUTENANT BRUCE MEDJUCK 
Interview Date: October 15, 2001 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



B. MEDJUCK 2 

MS. BASTEDENBECK: The time is now 1123 
hours. My name is Christine Bastedenbeck . 
I work for the New York City Fire 
Department. Today I'm conducting an 
interview with the following individual. 

Please state your name, rank, title, 
your assigned command area of the Fire 
Department . 

LIEUTENANT MEDJUCK: Bruce Medjuck, 
Lieutenant, assigned to EMS operations. 

MS. BASTEDENBECK: Also present at the 
interview today is -- 

MR. ECCLESTON: Christopher Eccleston 
of the New York City Fire Department, World 
Trade disaster task force. 

Q. Lieutenant Medjuck, we're going to ask 
you if you could please give us a synopsis of the 
events that happened September 11th, 2001, in 
regards to yourself. 

A. Okay. Begin? 
Q. Yes. 

A. I don't know. Tuesday morning I was 
up -- actually I had done my little tasks in the 
office, some small tasks. Then I had come 



B. MEDJUCK 3 

upstairs to the office of medical affairs, and I 
was talking to Paramedic Delgado when we received 
a phone call from a representative of the New 
York State Department of Health. Mr. Farrell 
called in and asked us what was going on at the 
World Trade Center. We were completely unaware 
of what was going on. It had to be about 8:30, 
quarter to 9. We were not sure what time it was. 

So we walked over to Laurie Santo, who 
was sitting at a computer that had CAD and we 
looked it up, the call, and she said that a plane 
had just hit the World Trade Center. 

So at that point Dr. Cherson walked 
over and told Manny, "Let's go." The pagers 
started going off, that the plane had just hit, 
you know, the group pager. 

So I actually ran downstairs to the 
office. By the time I ran back to operations, 
Lieutenant Mann and Lieutenant Nevins were 
getting radios from Lieutenant Frick and they 
were running out of the building. 

So Captain Olszewski and I -- I grabbed 
a set of radios and all of my equipment. We went 
downstairs to Captain Olszewski's car, which was 



B. MEDJUCK 4 

parked in the outdoor parking lot. We got into 
one of the Chevy Luminas . I'm not sure of the 
number . 

I had called the RCC supervisor, which 
was Lieutenant Vitale at the time, and asked her 
to log us on, responding into the incident. We 
actually had to respond there down Flatbush 
Avenue without my lights and sirens trying to get 
through traffic. 

Janice was driving, and we got into 
the -- they let us onto the Brooklyn Bridge. 
There was nothing on the Brooklyn Bridge. There 
were just emergency vehicles, all unmarked 
emergency vehicles responding in front of us. 

I would note as we were coming out of 
the girder part of the Brooklyn Bridge just as 
you could see it clearing. We saw when we first 
started to go over the Brooklyn Bridge, the 
building smoking, tower one smoking, heavy black 
smoke coming out. Just as we came out of the 
bridge, we could see again the towers also with 
the plane come and slam into tower two. 

There was like a little bit of delay, 
and then all of a sudden this fire ball just shot 



B. MEDJUCK 5 

out of the opposite side of the tower. When we 
saw -- I said to Janice: Did you see that, did 
you see that? She said no, I had my hands on the 
steering wheel; I'm watching the road. 

So we came off of the bridge, and we 
actually went straight onto Chambers Street, 
where we came out. You know how the bridge lets 
you off by Chambers Street. We were trying to 
cut through all this traffic on Chambers Street 
in a car without any lights or sirens. Janice is 
driving as best as she could. 

We cut across to West Street, and on 
West Street we cut left and went over to Vesey. 
By that time there were emergency vehicles all 
over the place. I told Janice just park the car 
on the corner of West and Vesey, which I marked 
on the map with a 1 next to it. We parked 
actually on the southwest corner. 

We got out, and just as we got out of 
the car we had noticed -- we went right up to 
Chief Gombo who was there already. He was with 
Ross Terranova. Ross was operating the radio. 
Lieutenant Davila was just coming up to talk to 
Chief Gombo, along with Captain Pinkus . 



B. MEDJUCK 6 

Who else? I think that was really it 
for supervisors. I noticed out of the corner of 
my eye Chief Ganci's driver/aide Steve Mosiello. 
He was there. 

Chief Gombo told myself and Janice -- 
he said something and then Rene Davila 
disappeared. Chief Gombo told myself and Janice 
to go over to the other side of the building on 
Church Street and set up a triage area, which was 
at the corner of Church and Fulton on the 
southeast corner, which I marked by a number 2. 
We were right in front of the Millennium Hotel. 

Then Lieutenant Davila came over there, 
and we were pretty much working out the 
logistics -- I mean, there were a lot of patients 
coming out of the buildings, a lot of people 
coming out, mostly with minor stuff going on. We 
were trying to organize what was going on, but 
there was just so much going on so quickly that 
we really didn't have a chance to really get a 
whole treatment and triage area established. 

I do remember when we were coming over 
from West and Vesey we went down -- we went east 
on Vesey Street. I remember just as we came past 



B. MEDJUCK 7 

the PATH train by Seven World Trade, the entrance 
to the PATH train over there, just as we came out 
from underneath that underpass right there, we 
saw a whole bunch of what I thought -- and I 
don't know but I thought was airplane parts, 
pieces of the airplane. 

I commented to Janice -- I was 
commenting in my own words about all of this -- 
all these pieces of plane that were hanging 
out -- that were just laying on the ground. 

I got over to the other side. We set 
up the area. I remember there were people coming 
up asking us if they could help, people that were 
trained, doctors and nurses. Everybody was 
volunteering to help. They were just dragging 
people out to us in the area there. 

I remember that Dr. Cherson came up at 
some point with Manny Delgado, helping us out 
over there. There were a whole bunch of units. 
I remember the Beekman unit was there. There 
were BLS units. Cabrini was there, New York 
Hospital. Cornell was there. There were some 
EMS units. I remember Alex Loudski being there, 
doing some tracking for Lieutenant Davila. 



B. MEDJUCK 8 

And then I remember someone coming up 
to me and telling me they were 49 Henry, a haztac 
truck, and they took out their hazmat tape and 
they cordoned off the whole area. We started to 
get people who weren't patients, throwing them 
out of the area and just bringing patients in 
there . 

Let me see what else. There were a 
whole bunch of people coming over to us, units 
just coming in and telling us that they were 
helping us out. And I really don't remember all 
the units because there was -- a lot of it's a 
blur . 

I remember them telling us that some 
cops came out of the building -- after we had 
started to establish in this chaotic area, a 
triage area. Even though it was chaotic, we 
still had some -- something going on there. We 
had divided all the stable people and all the 
critical people. We were taking and moving out 
the critical people as they came. We were 
actually starting to move out the stable people, 
some of the stable people, also. 

I remember cops coming out of the World 



B. MEDJUCK 9 

Trade Center saying that there were a whole bunch 
of people stuck in an elevator shaft and that 
they needed us to go in there and bring them out. 
We were like you have to bring them out to us. 

Some ESU cops -- the next thing I 
remember was quickly getting from one of the 
medics reevaluating patients and who really 
was -- we did a whole re-triaging the critical 
and non-critical patients. 

I remember them then bringing out this 
lady on a door that they had made a makeshift 
long board for her. They put her on the board, 
and she had burns on her and she had this back 
injury. 

I remember Dr. Cherson saying that we 
have no time, because there was a doctor there 
also that wanted to do, you know, multi traumas 
with sterile -- with water and everything for the 
burns. Dr. Cherson was saying, we need to get 
these critical patients out of here, go to the 
hospital . 

I remember there was a lot of -- and 
you couldn't control it. A lot of -- as 
ambulances were coming in, patients, they weren't 



B. MEDJUCK 10 

even getting to the triage area but they were 
just getting loaded up with patients and going. 

I remember Commissioner Drury coming up 
to me and saying to me, "Where is the command 
post?" I sent him to the other side to West 
Street . 

Cops coming and helping. Everyone was 
just coming and helping, but it was so chaotic. 
Actually now it's kind of like really a blur. 

Then I just remember that, distinct 
noise like an airplane being on a runway and it's 
ready to take off. I heard the loud roaring of 
like the engines, and I thought another plane was 
hitting the building. 

Someone yelled run. I looked up, and 
the top of the tower I saw was starting to move 
over. It was bending like it was going to come 
down. Everybody started running. I ran up the 
block, and I didn't know what to do. I was all 
confused. I mean, everyone was running. People 
were falling on the floor. Nobody was helping to 
do anything. Everybody was just running for 
their life. 

I know I made it about a third of the 



B. MEDJUCK 11 

way up the block, and I went to go get underneath 
a car, the trunk area of the car. I slid 
underneath there. And as I slid underneath 
there, this big blast just came and knocked me 
down the rest of the way. 

I remember my helmet falling off, and I 
was in the fetal position underneath the car. As 
I turned my head to see what was going on, to see 
if I could see underneath the car, because I 
really didn't know what was happening, I thought 
a plane had actually hit the building, a third 
plane. It was just this huge blast of smoke that 
hit me in the face, white smoke. Then it was 
pitch-black. I couldn't even see. 

I didn't think I was going to die from 
stuff falling; I thought I was going to die from 
the asphyxiation. It was just incredible. I 
couldn't breathe. I was trying to spit this 
stuff out. I'm feeling around for my helmet 
because I really don't know what's going on. 

I looked over my shoulder. It's 
pitch-black, and I remember seeing this ball of 
flames shooting down the street, and then it just 
sucked right back into itself. It went away. 



B. MEDJUCK 12 

Then it started to clear up. 

There was a lady in front of me leaning 
underneath the car, and I asked the lady if she 
was okay. She kept saying to me: No, I'm not 
okay, no, I'm not okay. I didn't know, if she 
wasn't okay, I couldn't do anything really for 
her . 

So I had gotten up, out from underneath 
the car, and I looked around. It was still white 
smoke, like you couldn't breathe. For some 
reason I walked back towards the Trade Center, 
and I walked in the whole area that we had just 
had the triage area. I remember leaving people 
there, the critical people that couldn't walk, 
that they dragged out and they weren't there 
anymore. Nothing. 

Ambulances were trashed over there. 
There were cars that were parked in the middle of 
the street, marked, unmarked police cars. I 
don't know who they belonged to. Things were 
just crushed and blown out. 

I was walking around. I was walking 
towards the Trade Center, and someone -- an EMT 
came up to me and kept on saying, Bruce, are you 



B. MEDJUCK 13 

okay, are you okay. It was Jai Zion of Battalion 
4. I was like yeah, I'm okay, I'm okay. 

He said come with me. I said no, I've 
got to look for everybody. I've got to start to 
regroup everybody. He's said no, come with me, 
come with me. I really don't have time for this. 
I said you go and come with me to the area. 

Then I started walking back up the 
block in the opposite direction of the Trade 
Center, and I ran into -- the first one that I 
ran into that I knew was Bill Melarango, 
Lieutenant Melarango. I saw him. He was walking 
up the block. He turned around and walked up the 
block . 

Then I ran into -- at the corner of 
Broadway and Fulton, I ran into Jay Swithers . I 
also remember running into Bonnie -- I don't know 
what Bonnie's last name is. She works down in 
BHS . She's a medic who worked down in BHS . I 
don't know what her last name was. I remember 
running into her, and she was helping someone 
walk . 

I got on the radio at this point, 
because I had a radio with me. I told them -- I 



B. MEDJUCK 14 

heard Captain Sickles on the radio, talking on 
the radio now. I told him that we were 
regrouping and we were now at Broadway and Fulton 
for a triage area. 

We found an ambulance that was just 
driving into the area, and we stopped them. We 
had a whole bunch of people just coming to the 
ambulance. People were bringing out stuff from 
stores, wheel barrows, garbage cans filled with 
water and drink and stuff like that. 

I remember going into the ambulance 
looking for a mask, and I couldn't find one. So 
I took a cravat and I tied it around my face like 
a bandanna so I wouldn't get killed by this 
smoke . 

I don't even know how long we were 
there. I remember Captain Sickles on the radio 
telling us that we needed resources over there. 
I remember seeing a fireman riding a motorcycle 
coming -- driving down there. 

I was talking to Jai and trying to say 
to Jai I lost Janice, I lost Phil Ashby. He was 
a medic that was with us. You know, all the 
people that I didn't know where they were. 



B. MEDJUCK 15 

Anybody who was with us in our triage area, I had 
no clue as to where they were. 

Then I ran into Dr. Cherson, and he's 
like where's Manny Delgado? We couldn't find 
Manny. We were looking for Manny. So we were 
like let's get this triage area and we'll find 
him. So now we were getting the triage area back 
in order, and he was helping us out. 

We didn't know what was going on really 
with anybody. I remember seeing Car 33 pull up 
and Lieutenant Mendez was in the car and 
Dr. Garcia was in the car. I don't know who 
else. And Jai was there and his ambulance crew. 
I remember St. John's paramedics were there in 
this area. 

We were getting overwhelmed with 
patients. We were just throwing patients into 
the ambulance. There were people coughing up, 
lying on the ground there. 

Then before -- all I know is that 
someone yelled another building -- the next 
building -- the other building's coming down. I 
didn't even hear the rumble this time. I just 
started running. I ran up a block. I didn't 



B. MEDJUCK 16 

know what block at the time it was, but I figured 
out afterwards where I came out. I ran up Ann 
Street . 

I was running up Ann Street, and there 
was a bay door open, a loading dock bay door. I 
saw a few people running in there, and I ran in 
there. I ran in, kept running into the bay. I 
rested on like the step where the trucks back up 
into to make it level. 

I remember them yelling close the door, 
close the door, close the door. All I know is I 
looked over my shoulder and I saw that big 
mushroom cloud coming in the door again. I 
jumped up on the bay, on the dock, and I ran into 
the building with all these other people running 
into the building. 

I just kept running, down -- everybody 
was running down two stories. I was running down 
two stories with them. We went into the 
basement, and I remember | | was with us. 

It was just me and him in this building. I told 

| -- I said, come on, we've got to go back 
upstairs. He said I'm not going back upstairs, I 
can't, I can't. Okay, stay down here, I'm going 



B. MEDJUCK 17 

to go upstairs and check it out. 

We couldn't find our way out of the 
building. We eventually came out in some diner 
that was part of the building, a little 
restaurant, that was part of the building. 
Everybody was in there: cops, people -- I 
remember I ran into a traffic agent telling me 
that she was having an asthma attack. I told her 
to just sit there, relax, I don't have any 
equipment with me. 

Then I came out of the building and I 
was like -- now it was a ghost town. I mean, 
after the second tower came down, Broadway -- 
there were cars, emergency vehicles all over the 
place, but there was nobody to be found. 

So I walked out. Again I ran into 
Dr. Cherson, for the second time. Every time a 
tower dropped, I'd find him. He was the only one 
that I would find. So this time I decided to 
stick with him. 

We found Pat Scaringello there. He was 
walking around in a daze. I said come on. I 
hear on the radio -- now I'm not talking on the 
radio. My battery is going dead. It's 



B. MEDJUCK IE 

beeping -- it was one of those new radios. It 
was beeping away. I told him that I heard them 
on the radio anyone south of the event should go 
to the ferry terminal; everybody north should go 
to Chelsea Piers. 

So I was like -- we're right smack in 
the middle. Let's start making our way. I told 
Dr. Cherson and Scaringello let's start making 
our way to the ferry terminal. So we said, you 
know what, we're not taking any chances. I said 
let's walk along the water so it's all clear. 

So I remember we started walking the 
wrong way. We were walking north on Broadway, 
because we really didn't know where we were. I 
worked lower Manhattan. I remember the Brooklyn 
Bridge. I remember people coming off. 

I remember we started to walk north on 
Broadway, and we saw this unmarked car -- we 
didn't know who it belonged to -- and a cop, an 
ESU cop, in the car in the passenger seat not 
moving. We were banging on the window. He 
didn't do anything. We opened the door, and he 
was in there petrified. We just closed the door 
and left him. 



B. MEDJUCK 19 

We had seen an ambulance come over. 
They were going back to Brooklyn. They were 
getting out of there. Then we started walking in 
the right direction, and we walked up some 
street. I don't even know what street we walked 
up. I think it was Fulton Street. We ended up 
walking up, me, Dr. Cherson and Pat Scaringello, 
walking up Fulton Street to the east side to the 
seaport . 

We found the St. John's medics -- we 
found the ambulance from St. John's. There was 
nobody in it, and it was running. 

Then we were walking up to where we 
found Manny Delgado right by Beekman Hospital. 
He was in that little square by Fulton Street -- 
and I don't even know what the heck the name of 
the street was. We found him standing there. So 
we got him together, and Pat. 

Then we hiked it. First I went to the 
ER to see who was in the ER. I saw a lot of 
ambulances there. I was trying to gather 
everybody to get them. But none of them were our 
ambulances . They all belonged to the volunteers . 

I walked inside to the ER, and it was a 



B. MEDJUCK 2 

madhouse in the ER, people all over the place. I 
remember saying you know what, I can't do 
anything here, there's nobody from us. So I 
walked out with Scaringello and left him there. 
He didn't want to come with us to the ferry 
terminal . 

So me, Manny and the doctor hiked it to 
the ferry terminal, and that's where we found 
Chief Basile standing there with Louie Cook. We 
were talking with him, and he said that we were 
putting together a treatment area up on the 
second floor of the ferry terminal, and he put me 
in charge of it, going to put it all together 
with Lisa Desena. She was the ALS coordinator 
for Division 4 . 

So we were there. We set up everything 
over there. We set up everything over there, and 
we were just -- people were coming in dribs and 
drabs, but more emergency personnel. They were 
making this a staging area. 

That was it. I mean, we stayed there 
until like 4:00. They brought food in. I ran 
into EMT Zion again. I mean, there were no real 
specifics going on there. That was the first 



B. MEDJUCK 21 

time I ran into Chief McCracken. The first time 
was there where I ran into him with Pauline 
Cronin . 

I got to use the phone for the first 
time. His phone was the only phone. I tried on 
my cell phone to make phone calls to tell someone 
I was okay. I couldn't get through. So I 
finally got through on Chief McCracken' s phone. 
I called here and spoke to Kathleen McCrory to 
call my wife and my mother to tell them I was 
okay. 

A lot of people were coming into the 
ferry terminal. I remember that off of the 
boats -- firemen were coming off of the boats 
from Staten Island. We set up a whole treatment 
and triage area over there. 

And we stayed there until like 4:00. 
Then we wanted to get out of there. So I left 
Chief Basile, Louie Cook, Chief Villani was there 
and a whole bunch of other people. We decided it 
was time for us to leave. 

Me, Manny and the doctor found his car. 
We walked back to Broadway and Fulton, found his 
car and drove his car out of there and went to 



B. MEDJUCK 22 

Battalion 4 to clean up. Some guy cleaned our 
car for us at Battalion 4 . We were in 
Dr. Cherson's car, because the car I drove over 
there, I have no idea what had happened to it. 

They told us -- after we got done at 
Battalion 4 and making phone calls -- because 
they actually had phones working at the time. I 
remember calling the office here, and this was 
like after 4:00 already. 

So then I -- what did we do? We were 
coming back to Metrotech here after 4:00, and 
they told us on the radio that they wanted us to 
go to Chambers and West Street to the command 
post there. So we drove back there, and we 
stayed there till -- I stayed there till like 
10:00 at night. 

Dr. Cherson was doing what he had to 
do. Manny Delgado, about five minutes before me, 
caught a ride back to Metrotech. I caught a ride 
back. I took Chief McCracken's car back to 
Metrotech at 10:00 at night with Lieutenant 
Cronin. There was someone else in the car with 
us; I can't remember who. Some Chief's aide came 
back with us? I don't remember who came back 



B. MEDJUCK 2 3 

with us here to Metrotech. 

We cleaned off the car. They brought 
me back in here and it was like go downstairs, 
get into uniform, take a shower. Then I took a 
shower and went home, and that was it for the 
day. 

To think about the people, all the EMTs 
that were lost and the medics that were lost in 
the World Trade Center, were all from our one 
triage area. And I don't know whether it was 
after the first collapse or the second collapse, 
because I never saw them -- I never saw anybody 
from our triage area after the first collapse. 

I was like I don't even know why I 
didn't go -- I never went back to West Street. I 
remember things like Captain Olszewski telling me 
in the triage area, maybe it would be a good idea 
to move the triage area back a little bit and I 
told her no, everything looked like it was 
starting to get organized. We wanted to set up a 
staging area, and we had set one up and it wasn't 
working because units were coming in from all 
over the place and just parking all over the 
street . 



B. MEDJUCK 2 4 

So I said well, let's just leave them 
park on Church Street. Janice said all that 
debris down there. I said that's the whole 
point, nobody's going to go down into that area 
because -- this was before the buildings 
collapsed. There's debris there, but there's 
like no one going over that area. So that would 
be a good area to start parking the ambulances, 
because I had seen the command car from Battalion 
4 parked there. 

I don't know. I think that's -- you 
run in with Dr. -- with other people. You start 
talking to them. Like I was talking to Jay 
Swithers, telling me when I saw him, you know, 
that things had occurred that I don't even 
remember, because people were asking me like the 
most ridiculous things like are any ACRs being 
done on these patients, any tracking being done 
on these patients. 

I was like you guys have got to be 
kidding. Like who really cares about that right 
now? There were so many patients there, we have 
no way of tracking them, you know. I couldn't 
believe supervisors were actually asking me these 



B. MEDJUCK 2 5 

questions. I was like to hell with it. You get 
your tracking done at another time. 

I remember Amy Monroe in our triage 
area. I remember she was in charge of the 
transportation end of it. Everybody who had 
transportation, Captain Olszewski told her to 
take transportation for our area. So she was 
handling that. 

I don't know. It's all like kind of a 
blur. The worst part about it is just 
remembering that thick, black smoke and that you 
couldn't breathe in it and worrying what was 
going to happen to me, am I going to die right 
here and now. 

The other thing that went through my 
mind was after I realized it was a terrorist 
attack, when the building came down, I didn't 
know it was the building coming -- I thought a 
third plane had hit the building, causing the 
building to come down. The things that went 
through my mind was there chemical warfare going 
on now. I mean, what's going on? I didn't 
realize -- I had no concept of what was going on. 
So many things going through your head. 



B. MEDJUCK 2 6 

That was really about it, that I 
remember. Little things that I don't remember, 
someone -- how people tell you about it and you 
just -- oh, yeah, that did happen. They refresh 
your memory. But that's about all that I can 
remember from my memory right now. 

Q. Anything else you wanted to add, Bruce? 
A. No. 

MS. BASTEDENBECK: This concludes our 
interview with Lieutenant Bruce Medjuck. 
The time now is 1155 hours. 
Thanks, Bruce. 



File No. 9110087 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

EMS LIEUTENANT CHARLES FRASER 

Interview Date: October 16, 2001 



Transcribed by Nancy Francis 



C. FRASER 

MR. FEILER: Today's date is October 16th, 
2001. The time now is 1007 hours and this is Monty 
Feiler of the Fire Department of the City of New York. 
I am conducting an interview with the following 
individual: 

Q. Please state your name, rank and assigned 
command . 

A. Lieutenant Charles Fraser, EMS Division 4. 

Q. Of the New York City Fire Department. 
We're conducting the interview at the 
conference room of the Division 4 EMS command at Queens 
General and the interview is regarding the events of 
September 11th, 2001. Also present for the interview 
is. 

MS. MAGGI : Diana Maggi, investigations and 
trials . 

Q. Go ahead, sir. We're looking into your 
participation in the World Trade Center incident. 

A. The morning of the incident, I was at the EMS 
Academy at Fort Totten in Queens and we were alerted 
that there was a plane crash at the World Trade 
Center. We saw a small clip of it on television. 
Shortly thereafter I was advised to start out to the 
scene with Lieutenant James Scullion. That was at the 



C. FRASER 

direction of Chief Charlie Wells that they were doing a 
recall of the hazmat trained and special operations 
division supervisors. 

I started out in the Bronco with him. He was 
driving and he said that we had gotten Charlie Wells on 
the cell phone and he said to direct ourselves into the 
lobby of 2 World Trade Center and set up operations 
there and that we would just coordinate with him what 
needed to be done. We took the Brooklyn-Queens 
Expressway over to the Brooklyn Bridge, and I recall we 
got about a quarter of the way onto the bridge and 
there were thousands of people just evacuating into 
Brooklyn over the bridge. As we headed into Manhattan, 
I looked over and we started to see the first tower 
come down, just a devastating sight, to the point where 
we had to physically stop because there were police 
cars in front of us. We looked over and I remember 
thinking, oh, my God, you'll never see this in your 
life again, and I remember actually blessing myself 
with the sign of a cross thinking, my God, there were 
people in there, there were guys in there, let alone 
our people, between police, fire and civilians. 

We came over the bridge, we went over Park 
Row, past City Hall, which they looked like they were 



C. FRASER 

attempting to secure and lock that down. We came down 
Park Row to Fulton Street, we came across Fulton, and 
as we pulled up on Church Street, we got out of the 
vehicle, we started to get on our bunker pants and get 
dressed ready to go into 2 World Trade when the second 
building started to come down and we heard on the radio 
a lot of people screaming Mayday, evacuate, it's coming 
down. We started to look up and we could see what 
looked like the top of this tower coming down at us, 
and then like a roller coaster, like a wooden roller 
coaster sound, and just bodies all over the ground, 
hitting the ground. 

We got into the vehicle, we started to pull 
out, we made a tight U-turn and we actually struck two 
metal parking stanchions that were in the way because 
there were a lot of vehicles on the street that we were 
trying to get around, and as we struck these two, the 
bumper came up into the front end of the vehicle and 
then on top of that two emergency service officers 
jumped onto the back of the vehicle and actually threw 
their weapons into the back window and jumped onto the 
vehicle, and I watched through the rear as people just 
like disappeared into the black smoke. We made it 
about a half a block to the east on Fulton and we 



C. FRASER 

stopped the vehicle. We couldn't proceed any further 
and we were just engulfed in a cloud. You couldn't see 
probably five feet in front of you, and then it just 
got darker and darker, the wind picked up, and then 
this stuff started hitting the vehicle, just large 
chunks of computer monitors and concrete and panes of 
glass. Then Jimmy Scullion with was able to get the 
vehicle started again. We drove up further. We 
actually drove out of it onto Park Row and we stopped 
at Park Row and we waited I'd say probably about ten 
minutes or so because you just couldn't proceed. You 
couldn't see where you were going. You couldn't move. 
We walked back down Fulton Street to Church, 
and when we got to Church Street, I guess we were on 
like Barclay and Church, we had noticed that there was 
a large setup of police emergency service. That's 
where we encountered the first EMS unit, 49 Henry. It 
was Kevin Barrett and Brendan Mulroy, two of our hazmat 
trained EMTs . We grouped them up and took them with 
us, and the next thing we did, I ran into Chief 
Mccracken's son and he had come in to the scene and he 
had been inquiring if anybody had heard of his father. 
I didn't hear him on the radio. I'd heard Captain 
Deshore on the radio quite a bit giving updates on 



C. FRASER 

patient counts and access, and then I didn't hear her 
on the radio anymore. There was a lot of silence on 
the radio. 

Q. What frequency were you on? 

A. I was on the Citywide command frequency. It 
was a lot of silence, nobody talking over EMS. 

Then we proceeded down into the subway 
station at Barclay Street and Church because they said 
that there was numerous people down there trapped 
towards West Street. We walked from Church all the way 
down to Barclay and West, and we couldn't exit the 
subway because there was so much debris and everything 
above us, but there were people down there. So we 
ended up coming out by -- I guess back to West Street, 
and as we came out on West Street, I ran into 
Lieutenant Kevin Haugh, who had responded down from 
Manhattan North, and what we started to do was pretty 
much safety and accountability, trying to find EMTs and 
medics that were just wandering. It was like they were 
shell shocked. They had lost their partners, they 
couldn't recall where they were, who they were with, 
where their vehicle was. We commandeered a city bus 
that was parked on West Street and we started to put 
everybody into that vehicle. 



C. FRASER 

The next one I ran into was Chief John 
Peruggia. He was establishing a command post on West 
Street by Barclay and he had assigned myself and 
Lieutenant Scullion and Lieutenant Haugh to do the 
safety officer and to start doing accountability and to 
try and access vehicles that were down on Liberty 
Street. There were numerous ambulances, they said, 
that were buried and could we get down there to ID 
these vehicles and/or the people. 

As we headed on down, it ended up we couldn't 
walk any further because the bridge had dropped across 
West Street. So what I ended up -- what we did was we 
went into 3 Financial, the American Express Building, 
we worked our way through the lobbies and we actually 
came out on the other side by Liberty. As I recall, I 
think there were about ten or eleven ambulances there 
and they were all buried in debris. Two of them were 
burning, actively burning. We had taken the VIN 
numbers off of them, the vehicle ID number, so that we 
could match it up, and later on in the tour we went to 
the Police Department and they were able to run the VIN 
number and give us the vehicle number and then trace 
down the crew that was with that. 

The other ambulances that were intact, we 



C. FRASER 

cleaned them off as much as we could, we spray painted 
them to ID what they were, whether it was fire, one was 
a Metro Care ambulance, and I remember there was a 
civilian dead next to that Metro Care ambulance but 
half under the vehicle and the legs were out, and as we 
pulled the person out to kind of see, the whole back of 
her head was blown off and it's like she was just 
decapitated. But she wasn't in a uniform. She was in 
civilian attire. So we covered her over with a blanket 
and then we ended up going through these vehicles, 
getting personal effects out that we could. You know, 
crews usually have a bag with personal effects. We 
went through there and tried to ID who was even in that 
vehicle. Once we obtained that information, we gave it 
to Captain Dave Fenton, who was doing accountability by 
then. This was about, I guess, 1:30, 2:00 o'clock in 
the afternoon. 

Then as we proceeded on, most of the rest of 
the evening I was doing safety officer work and 
accountability stuff, working mainly off of the back 
side by North End there, I would say, up by 2 World 
Financial Center and the Winter Garden, assisting with 
setting up temporary morgue and safety of EMS people 
because we had a lot of off-duty people that weren't 



C. FRASER 

even tagged in the system that we didn't even know 
where they were, taking down their Social Security 
number, regrouping them, keeping them into a triage 
treatment area. 

I think the hardest part that we had on the 
overnight -- well, I would say right after and 
preceding the second collapse and then on into the 
afternoon was just we had no resources, we had no 
equipment, we had nothing. And radio communications, 
same thing, we just couldn't get through. You couldn't 
get through no matter what you tried to do 
accountability. 

Q. The off-duty people, anybody that you 
recognized, any names offhand? 

A. I know Maureen Bartwink from Battalion 49 was 
there. She had come down with her partner, which was 
Ron McCue. They were together. Jack O'Loughlin, a 
lieutenant from Queens was there. Early on, as a 
matter of fact, we had turned over a triage area that 
we set up by Park Row and Fulton Street, we had set up 
a large triage treatment area prior to going into that 
subway entrance. Lieutenant Scullion and I had gotten 
a few ambulance resources together along with St. 
Vincent's Hospital and Lieutenant O'Loughlin said he 



10 

C. FRASER 



would take over that sector so that we could proceed on 
when we got this request that there were people in the 
subway. So I know he was there off duty. But that's 
about it that I can recall offhand. 

Q. Did you ever enter any of the towers? 

A. No. 

Q. The second one or -- 

A. No. They collapsed and on our way back we 
had been sent --we had gotten sidetracked prior to 
reporting to Chief Peruggia because they said that 
there were five police officers that were buried, and 
that would be, I guess, I'm looking at 1 World Trade 
Center, and they were in between 6 and 1 World Trade, 
and we had gotten down there and ended up -- I remember 
a police officer coming to me and he had a serious hand 
injury, actually, it was a detective, in uniform with a 
detective shield, and he had a left hand with serious, 
serious injury, burned, cut down to the bone, and we 
had treated him with St. Vincent's paramedics and they 
had removed him to a treatment area. But when we tried 
to get up into where these officers were, it was like 
walking in snow. Every three footsteps you took, you 
were back one, and it was just like in a deep, muddy 
slush . 



11 

C. FRASER 



Most of the entry that we did was down by 
around 1 World Trade and 3 World Trade later in the 
afternoon because we had a lot of EMS people. Some 
were in uniform, some weren't in uniform, and they were 
just wandering about, like trying to help out in 
different areas. So what we had worked to do was pull 
those people out and get them into a unified treatment 
area so that we'd have accountability of them. 

I'm thinking of who. I know I had Steve 
Scarinzi with me from Battalion 49. He had come down 
off duty and I linked up with him, I guess, 1:00, 2:00 
o'clock in the afternoon, and I had him for a good part 
of the evening with us. 

Q. Where did you leave the Bronco? 
A. The Bronco was left on Park Row right by I 
guess Broadway, Park Row and Broadway, because right 
here is a cutout on the map where there's some parking 
stanchion. We had parked it there. There was 
significant damage to the front end from us trying to 
pull out. Luckily enough, we had particulate masks 
that we had found in the vehicle, so we were able to 
get masks on right away because I don't think we would 
have been able to proceed any further. I mean, it was 
just you couldn't breathe, it was just so thick, and 



12 
C. FRASER 



those masks only lasted probably 15 minutes before you 
were saturated. 

Q. Is there anything else that you think is 
important, any other recollections or impressions that 
you'd like to add before we conclude? 

A. Not really, no. 

MR. FEILER: Okay. I want to thank you on 
behalf of the Department for conducting the interview 
with us. The time now is 1021 hours and this concludes 
the interview. 



File No. 9110088 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMT SAL SANGENTI 
Interview Date: October 16, 2001 



S. SANGENTI 



MONTE FEILER: Today's date is October 16, 2001. The time now is 9:48. 
This if Monte Feiler of the Fire Department of the City of New York. I am conducting an 
interview with the following individual. . .please state your name, rank and assigned 
command. 

SAL SANGENTI: EMT Sal Sangenti, assistant to the division 4 commander. 

Q: Of the New York City Fire Department. We are conducting the interview 
at the conference room of the Division 4 EMS command, Queens General, regarding the 
events of September 11, 2001. Also present at the interview is. . . 

DIANA MAGGI: Diana Maggi, Investigations and Trials. 

Q: Go ahead starting with when you first became aware of the incident and 
the events surrounding that. 

A: Okay, I was sitting in the office waiting for Chief Carrasquillo to come 
into the office, he notified me by phone telling me that we were going to the 1040 at the 
World Trade Center. I was aware of this because we were all monitoring CAD, and at 
that point myself, Jason Katz, who is Chief Day's aide, and Captain Rivera were here and 
we all went into Chief Carrasquillo 's car and responded to the scene. We went to the 
command post and at that time, both towers were engulfed. As we were setting up, I 
couldn't tell you a time frame, but at that point, when we were setting up, the first 
building collapsed. 

Q: When you arrived, where did the vehicle stop? Where did you park? 



S. SANGENTI 



A: On West, I can't tell you the street. . .1 am bad with directions in Queens, 
but in Manhattan it was even worse. But I know we were on West. 

Q: Okay, and you said you went to the EMS command post? 

A: The command post there. Chief Ganci was there, Chief Gombo, Captain 
Sickles, Lieutenant Moore, myself, Chief Carrasquillo, Chief Browne, Jason Katz, I think 
that was it. All I remember. 

Q: Where was that located? 

A: That was across the street on West. It was in front of a parking garage. 

Q: Was it on the Trade Center side of West, or on the River side? 

A: It was on. . .1 don't remember. It was, it had to be the Trade Center. . . 

Q: Do you remember crossing over a barrier? 

A: No. 

Q: Okay. 

A: It was on the West side, I guess the water side. 

Q: Then what happened? 

A: Then at that point we were there just trying to strategize and at that point, 
the building collapsed. Myself and Chief Carrasquillo and numerous people ran into the 
garage and I found a little room to the left side of the garage. It was myself, a Port 
Authority female Sargent, and a detective were in the room. We had air for the first 20 
seconds, then the room got engulfed. The room had air conditioning, so at that point the 



S. SANGENTI 

air started to circulate a little, and we kind of got our composure, but unfortunately, there 
was debris in front of the room now and we were stuck in the room. I kind of told 
everybody, just relax. I don't know how I took the initiative, but I did, told everybody 
just relax. The woman, I wiped her face off cause she was really engulfed with the ashes. 
The ash and the concrete and all the other stuff, and the time frame I couldn't tell you. 
But at that point we were able to get out and I finally heard a fireman who said come on, 
let's go through the garage. We went through the garage and we ended up outside, I 
couldn't tell you exactly where I was. I lost my whole, you know. . . 

Q: How were you able to get out of the room? 

A: Actually we kind of, it was maybe 2 Vi maybe 3 feet of debris, and we just 
kicked it. We kicked as much as we could. It was a lot of paper, dust, actually I 
remember kicking a vehicle mirror. Because I stepped on it and I thought I stepped on 
someone's glasses, and it was an actual mirror. At that point, we got out and we walked 
through the garage and came up where I couldn't tell you. 

Q: Did you have any radio or cell phones? 

A: I had a radio and my own personal cell phone. 

Q: Did any of them work down there? 

A: No. Actually, I thought I lost my phone, but I had everything in tact, then 
I couldn't anybody. The only people I was with were the fireman, the Port Authority 
Sargent, and the detective. That was it. 

Q: Did you get anybody's name or commands? 



S. SANGENTI 



A: There were no names, and at this point that I remember, I didn't see any 
EMS people at all. At that point, I really thought that Chief Carrasquillo was gone. 
Because the way it works is, if you ran to the sides I don't know if you would have 
survived. The building was the way to go cause you had some kind of cover. That was 
it, and then it felt like an hour, but it was probably just minutes that I walked. I walked to 
probably by. . .I'll tell you in a second, I'm bad with directions. . .it was by the water, so it 
has to be, I couldn't even tell you, I'm sorry. I remember walking towards the water, I 
remember seeing the water, and I must have walked like four blocks and I finally saw 
Chief Carrasquillo. 

Q: And where was he? 

A: He? Again, I know he was there with Chief Gombo and Chief 
Kowalczyk. Hugged them and thanked them, that was it. At that point, the second 
collapse went and we were probably about a block away. The dust and all the other stuff 
hit us and at that point I couldn't get my composure. I just sat there and relaxed and at 
that point we started to get everyone together, and we took it from there. We went to 
Chambers and West and that's when they established a command post. Me, Ron Pfeffer, 
and at that point was when everyone started to come, Charlie Wells, J.P. Martin. Then 
everything started to, you know, fall into place. 

Q: Do you know the location where you met them? Where they met you 
actually. . . 



S. SANGENTI 



A: Actually it was in the back, where's the school? Where's Stuyvesant? 

Q: I think Stuyvesant is up here by Chambers Street. 

A: So what I did was I walked over here. They were gonna establish a 
command post at Stuyvesant, but they weren't sure if there was a gas leak in the school, 
or it was running underneath the school. So they moved everything, they moved 
everything to Chambers and West. 

Q: Did you ever enter any of the buildings? 

A: The Trade Centers? No. 

Q: Number 7 World Trade Center? 

A: No. 

Q: Did you have to treat any patients? 

A: I mostly just helped. I helped a lady, she was walking, when I finally got 
out of the garage, there was a lady there. She was pretty much just dazed, and I helped 
her I said come on, keep walking, keep walking, and that was it. 

Q: Is there anything else that you felt was important? Any other people that 
you may have seen: firefighters, EMS? 

A: No, pretty much like I said, the only people that I know are the chiefs, 
cause I work with them. I remember seeing Chief Ganci, I remember seeing Chief 
Gombo, Chief Kowalczyk, Chief Carrasquillo. But once I got into the garage, I lost 
everyone. 



S. SANGENTI 



Q: Okay, anything else? 
A: That's it. 

Q: I want to thank you for you time so we can conduct these interviews, and 
the time is 9:57. This interview is concluded. 



File No. 9110089 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

CHIEF PEDRO CARRASQUILLO 

Interview Date: October 16, 2001 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



P. CARRASQUILLO 2 

MR. FEILER: Today's date is October 
16th, 2001. The time now is 9:16 hours. 
This is Monte Feiler of the Fire Department 
of the City of New York. I am conducting on 
interview of the following individual. 

Please state your name, rank and 
assigned area of command. 

CHIEF CARRASQUILLO: Pedro 
Carrasquillo, Division 4, EMS command. 

MR. FEILER: Of the New York City Fire 
Department . 

We're conducting the interview in the 
conference room of Division 4 EMS command, 
the property of Queens General Hospital. 
The interview is regarding the events of 
September 11th, 2001. 

Also present is -- 

MS. MAGGI : Diana Maggi, investigations 
and trials. 
Q. Go ahead, sir. 

A. Heading into the office that morning, 
when on the air, I heard conditions 04, 
Lieutenant Rene Davila, sounding very anxious on 
the radio stating that there was some form of 



P. CARRASQUILLO 3 

explosion. I didn't catch it all. I raised the 
volume and then heard him indicate that there was 
a plane that ran into the side of the World Trade 
Center . 

So right away I started continuing into 
Queens General. I called citywide. I told them 
that I would be responding. I came by Queens 
General on my way from home, picked up Sal 
Sangeniti, picked up Captain J.R. Rivera, and I 
picked up Jason Katz, who were here waiting for 
me. 

We continued in. Then we heard the 
report of a second airplane crashing into the 
other tower. Initially I thought it was just one 
of the commuter planes, or one of the 
sight-seeing planes along the water there, but 
then when I heard the second plane, then right 
away I thought it must have been terrorist 
activity, but still not knowing what type of 
aircraft went into the building. 

So we responded in. Traffic was heavy. 
We were able to get through into the express lane 
and went in through the Midtown Tunnel, taking 
the drive southbound and seeing the smoke and 



P. CARRASQUILLO 4 

seeing the World Trade Center. At one point, 
seeing the gaping hole on one of the towers and 
the smoke on the other going all the way up, I 
was thinking everybody from that point on up will 
probably be dead if not from the smoke, certainly 
from the fire. 

We took the tunnel underneath the tip 
of Manhattan and came up alongside, I think it's 
the New York Athletic Club. I parked a couple 
blocks before the World Trade Center just because 
I didn't want to go too much closer with my 
vehicle. 

I parked, got out. People were 
running. I got out, got my helmet, got my 
turnout coat. At that point, right there, there 
was some debris, and there were some body parts 
that were on the street. Some of the police 
officers were trying to cordon off those areas. 
So we were very careful when we were walking. 

We went over the median onto the West 
side of West Street and continued up to the 
command post, which was directly across the 
street from the World Trade Center. At that 
point, just before I got to the command post I 



P. CARRASQUILLO 5 

saw Jack Delaney with his medics from the New 
York Hospital, Columbia Presbyterian, and they 
had their vehicles diagonally parked on West 
Street. They were out in front of the vehicle. 

I called Jack and his men over because 
that location didn't seem to be a safe location 
because of the debris that was falling out of the 
buildings. So they came over by the command 
post. They had given them instructions, and they 
took off in the south direction to their 
assignment . 

I reported to the command post. Chief 
Gombo was there. I remember seeing Chief Browne 
and Jason Katz, who came with me, went with Chief 
Brown. They got their assignment, and they 
headed in a south direction. 

I hadn't gotten my assignment yet. We 
were talking. Then all of a sudden we heard a 
noise. People started running. People were 
saying that the building was collapsing. At that 
point I heard the noise. It was enough for me to 
react and run. 

I didn't turn around to look. I just 
heard the noise coming down, and it was like a 



P. CARRASQUILLO 6 

jet engine, just getting louder and louder. 

At that moment I'm thinking which way 
to run, north or south. And it seemed like the 
corners on either direction was falling and I 
wouldn't be able to outrun this thing. So we all 
retreated into a garage that had a ramp going 
down directly across the street. I think it was 
the American Express building or one of those 
buildings there. 

We went in. As we're running down, I'm 
looking at where I can hide. There were some 
little cutouts as you're going down the ramp. So 
I went to one of them. There were three other 
firefighters there. We squatted down. Just as 
we did that, everything just passed right through 
into the tunnel, into the garage ramp. 

At that moment everything was just 
total darkness. You couldn't see anything. You 
couldn't breathe. We were coughing. I got out 
my handkerchief so I could at least use that as 
some type of filter. I got a couple breaths, and 
then you're just coughing. 

Firefighters there had on their 
respirators, and then some of them had 



P. CARRASQUILLO 7 

flashlights. So at least we were able to head -- 
we were all starting to head in the up ramp 
direction going up, which is the way that we had 
come down . 

I'm hearing people saying that we were 
sealed in. So right away the first thing is, 
that's it, this is how we're going to die, down 
here. I remember Chief Ganci behind me, hearing 
his voice, stating that we have to move up. Up 
is out. 

So we started to go up. We're getting 
towards the top, and you couldn't see. There was 
total, total darkness. I see a flashlight 
shining from the top and somebody screaming down 
that this is outside. We started working our way 
up towards that light, and there was debris all 
over. So you really had to be careful on how you 
were stepping because you would trip and fall. 

When we got outside, there was a 
suburban right next to the entrance. I don't 
know if it was pushed up there or how it got 
there. So at that point you still couldn't see 
anything, but you could see silhouettes of trees, 
so we knew we were on the outside. 



P. CARRASQUILLO 8 

I started heading north to the corner, 
which is Vesey Street, and there we started to 
regroup some of the people. As I was walking 
West on Vesey, I ran into Captain Stone, who 
appeared to be injured. His shoulder was hurting 
him. I saw Artie Gonzalez who was a paramedic 
out of Bellevue that was there. 

Then I went into the lobby of the 
American Express building. In the lobby I ran 
into a couple of other EMTs, but at that point I 
really couldn't see much because I was covered in 
the soot. So I was able to get some water to 
clean my face, cough, spit, gargle, trying to get 
some of that soot out of me and clean my glasses. 

Then we started --we were hearing of 
possible gas leaks and possibly the next building 
coming down. So we started to get everybody 
mobilized at the west -- West of West Street 
by -- 

Q. I have a map. 

A. -- Vesey and North Street, I believe it 
was. We started to go up Vesey Street, and we 
started heading towards North End. At North End 
on the northeast corner there's an Embassy 



P. CARRASQUILLO 9 

Suites. We started to make that a triage 
treatment area for all the people that we were 
bringing in. 

At that location we started to meet 
Captain Sickles, J.R. Rivera again, Sal, I saw 
them, because we lost contact once we ran down 
into the garage. Then Chief Gombo was there, 
Chief Pascale. I don't know where they were 
before. So we started making a treatment area. 

Then I went back down Vesey Street to 
make sure that everybody started to clear out 
from the American Express lobby that we were at. 

Then I decided to take a walk towards 
West Street just to see if in fact that tower, 
the whole tower, had come down, which confirmed, 
yes, that it was completely down. 

I started to walk back again, making 
sure everybody was out, and started to get all 
the vehicles, all the personnel to North End. 

As I was walking back, I heard the 
second sound, which was the second building 
coming down. I ran into the American Express or 
right in between here, looked around. I saw a 
lot of windows. Now I'm looking for a place that 



P. CARRASQUILLO 10 

I'm not going to get hit with flying debris. 

I had two EMTs, that I don't know who 
they were, male and female. I told them come on 
this way. There was a civilian that was going to 
walk out. I said you can't walk out there, the 
tower is collapsing. I grabbed him. Then we 
went behind this marble pillar, a huge marble 
pillar with a wall behind it, back there and 
squatted down. 

The second wave came down through Vesey 
Street, blowing out the windows along the sides 
there. Then I told the guy can we get out 
another way, and he said yes. We were able to go 
through some hallway. We came out on North 
Street. We were able to go underneath and came 
out here and then walked over to the Embassy 
Suites lobby there. 

There we tried to regroup who was going 
where. Chief Gombo, everybody was going now to I 
think it was police headquarters. They told me 
to initially go to Chelsea, but then they 
assigned somebody else to Chelsea and I stood 
there. 

Q. How did you receive those orders? 



P. CARRASQUILLO 11 

A. No, no, no, we were there in the lobby. 
Chief Gombo was there, Peruggia was there, Fran 
was there, Chief Pascale and myself. 

Q. That was in the lobby of American 
Express? 

A. No, this was in the lobby of the 
Embassy Suites. 

So everybody got their assignments. I 
think Chief Basile was there as well. He went to 
the ferry terminal. He was working his way out 
to the ferry terminal, I believe. Chief Villani 
was heading that direction as well. Chief 
Pascale went to the Chelsea Piers for the staging 
area out there. And I stood at Vesey. 

We were treating people, and we started 
to -- I started to let everybody --we need to 
get these people into vehicles and out of here 
and to the hospital or to an area of Chambers 
Street, because now we're getting reports there 
was gas leaking and possibly rupturing. So we 
were not in a safe area. 

We started to do that. We got 
everybody outside. Then we drove all the 
vehicles -- some of the patients got into the 



P. CARRASQUILLO 12 

vehicles, and we transported them out to the area 
hospitals. The rest of the vehicles continued 
now northbound to Chambers Street. 

At Chambers Street, we regrouped there, 
and we were going to start a treatment area by 
the grass area. We went up Vesey, and we went up 
West End. We worked our way back here to 
Chambers Street, which is right near Stuyvesant 
School. 

We were going to go into this area 
that's indicated North Park to set up some sort 
of a treatment area there so that in the event 
that we needed to transport people and the area 
was blocked off and we couldn't get vehicles, 
there were some ships, boats, that were coming 
in. So we would use them to get the people out 
of there and take them either uptown, downtown or 
to Jersey, if needed. 

At that point, however someone came by 
and we had to evacuate that area because there 
were gas lines underneath there and that would 
possibly blow up. So we regrouped then and just 
went down the block on Chambers, and we went to 
Chambers and West. 



P. CARRASQUILLO 13 

As we were retreating from some of 
these places -- I mean, a lot of equipment too 
was just left behind, and vehicles, until we were 
able to come back later on. At any rate, we 
regrouped to Chambers and West. Chief Peruggia 
and myself were there. Then we set tried to set 
up a plan. 

He stood in control of communications, 
and then I went as the liaison with OEM at the 
Fire Department. And we just kept on operating 
at that location with some of our units. As we 
would get patients, we would treat them and take 
them out of there or transport them or treat them 
and release. 

At that point we wound up getting a 
large contingency of people from the academy. So 
they were outside, and we told the captain from 
the academy -- I don't know his name --to get 
all the personnel and bring them into the area of 
Stuyvesant School and leave them in there, 
because outside were all the dust -- every time 
the vehicles drove by, it just picked up all the 
dust and debris. Then as we were going to 
utilize them, then we would call them. 



P. CARRASQUILLO 14 

Then I just worked as the liaison 
office with OEM, and I was just coordinating 
whatever resource they needed. Then we started 
to try to get a sense of who was missing. We 
didn't know how many units were assigned and so 
on. So we just took a tally of the units nearby. 

Then we just continued to operate. I 
attended a couple of the OEM meetings, what we 
needed, where we were going to set up. We talked 
about possibly having a field hospital. We were 
going to set it up at the North Park area, 
because now it was secured so we were able to 
get --we were going to try to get the Parks 
Department to set up some tents. 

We had a Coast Guard cutter that was 
anchored along the side, and they were able to 
provide us with generator power and supplies and 
water and so on. 

So that was a plan. We were trying to 
get a hold of the medical examiner to set up a 
morgue sector or request for a team, because we 
knew we were going to have to process a lot of 
bodies there. So we were trying not to 
anticipate a lot of things. 



P. CARRASQUILLO 15 

Following the meeting, OEM -- because 
OEM got established in the Stuyvesant School, we 
were there. They told us in the morning they 
were going to get a ship, a hospital ship, that 
was coming in and anchoring at the pier. Then 
the rest of the resources and some troops and 
whatever things that we needed. 

So we spoke about DMAT teams coming in 
to try to set up as treatment areas and just 
continue to operate there throughout the night. 

Q. When you were coming in, you said that 
you heard Lieutenant Davila talking. Was that on 
citywide? 

A. Citywide, yeah. 

Q. That's the frequency that you were 
listening to? 

A. Yeah. 

Q. And when you called citywide, you did 
that by radio or telephone? 

A. Telephone. 

Q. Did they give you any specific area to 
respond to? 

A. No. I just told them I would be 
heading in, going to the command post. Then I 



P. CARRASQUILLO 16 

called RCC. I called to RCC and told them call 
all the stations throughout the city, anybody 
that's going home, they have to stay, and try to 
keep as many people as possible, in the event 
that we would need more resources down there. 

I wasn't the incident commander, but 
I'm sure that the people there had their hands 
full and I didn't know if any of them had relayed 
any information, so I just did that on my own. 
And I spoke to -- just before I left 
here, I told the crew here and the L S U crew 
here to respond not to incident but just on the 
other side, on the Queens side of the Midtown 
Tunnel area. In the event if they needed them, 
they would be right there so they can just go in. 

Q. When you arrived at the scene, you came 
out of the tunnel that connects to the FDR Drive 
and the West Side Highway? 

A. Correct. 

Q. Where did you say you parked your 
vehicle? 

A. I parked my vehicle on the east side of 
West Street or the West Side Highway right near 
the New York Athletic Club, the club down there. 



P. CARRASQUILLO 



17 



Q. You know what, mark it if you see it on 
there. 

A. I believe it was -- 

Q. Is that where the vehicle stayed for 
the remainder of the incident? 

A. Until about 3 in the morning, when I 
looked for it. I brushed off all the debris. 

Q. When the first building collapsed and 
you retreated into the underground garage, you 
said you met up with three firefighters. Were 
you able to determine their names or where they 
were from? 

A. No. 

Q. And then you heard Chief Ganci? 

A. I heard his voice, yeah. 

Q. You never were face-to-face with him? 

A. No, you couldn't see. 

Q. Did you meet up with him any time after 
that or you lost contact? 

A. No, I went back to Vesey Street, and I 
went into the American Express building to try to 
first clean myself off and then try to establish 
some form of a treatment area. 

Q. Other than the people that you 



P. CARRASQUILLO 18 

mentioned, did you see any other EMS officers, 
EMTs, medics, fire officers that you know? 

A. No. Those are the people that I 
recall. There was another medic that I saw in 
the lobby, Perez, from -- I think he's -- he used 
to work for us. That's the only one I recall. 
He asked me if I was okay. Then that's when I 
just cleaned myself off, at least my face, 
anyway . 

Q. Besides the American Express and the 
Embassy Suites, did you ever enter either one of 
the trade towers? 

A. No. 

Q. Building number seven? 

A. No. 

Q. Initially you said there was an EMS 
command post that you met up with Chief Gombo. 
Where was that? 

A. That was there, right across the street 
from the Trade Center, just next to the garage. 

Q. The north tower or the south tower? 

A. It was in between both towers. 

Q. Can you just X that, make it D. 

A. I think it was in this area here, 



P. CARRASQUILLO 19 

because I remember this pedestrian bridge being 
on the outside and looking trying to see where. 
This is the area. 

Q. Is there anything else that you think 
is important that you would like to add before we 
conclude? 

A. No. 

MR. FEILER: I want to thank you for 

your time and providing this interview. 

It's 9:38 hours, and we'll conclude this 

interview. 



File No. 9110090 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMT ROBERT SHORT 
Interview Date: October 16, 2001 



R. SHORT 

MONTE FEILER: Today's date is October 16, 2001. The time is 11:01 and 
this is Monte Feiler of the New York City Fire Department. I am conducting an 
interview with the following individual. . .please state your name, rank, title, and area of 
command. 

ROBERT SHORT: Robert Short, EMT, 5071 MERV operator for Division 4. 

Q: The New York City Fire Department. We are conducting this interview in 
the conference room of Division 4 at Queens General Hospital regarding the events of 
September 11, 2001. Also present is... 

DIANA MAGGI: Diana Maggi, Investigations and Trials. 

Q: Okay, if you can just start off with what your assignment was that day and 
how you became aware of the incident. 

A: My assignment was Merv 4 operator. I got assigned, I don't remember the 
exact time I got assigned on the job. 

Q: Who assigned you? 

A: The citywide dispatcher. We were told not to go through the tunnel, so we 
went up 59 th street. Not 59 th street, Queens Boulevard, over the 59 th Street Bridge, and 
down Second Avenue, cause they had it completely closed off. As we were going down, 
that's when we seen, I guess it was the second (I don't really remember) you 



R. SHORT 

know, hitting the tower. Cause the first tower was on fire, as we were coming over the 
bridge, we saw that. Then we parked at West and Vessey. 

Q: Who directed you to park there? 

A: Lietenant Hadala 

Q: Where did you meet up with him? 

A: We all parked. He was in his command car, it was an LSU truck in front 
of me, then it was me with the MERV. As soon as we pulled up, we immediately were 
contacting patients. 

Q: Okay, who was in the MERV with you? 

A: A paramedic Dibriano. We started treating the patients, most of them 
were firefighters. I remember one—then I think the building collapsed. All the smoke, or 
whatever it was, the debris and everything, we got knocked out of the MERV. Whoever 
was in the MERV, I don't know what happened to them. Cause a lot of them ran out, ran 
in. All of our equipment got blown out and everything so we ended up, I don't know 
where I ended up because it was dark. But we ended up somewhere near the water. I 
was by myself. No EMS personnel, I don't know who it was, but I guess it was near the 
water, yeah. Then I went back to the MERV and started cleaning out the debris, cause it 
was mostly all dust and everything. Then a fire captain, I remember this clearly, a fire 
captain ran up to me and said look, I lost all of my men. I can't get into contact. 

Q: Do you know what his name was? 



R. SHORT 



A: No, I think he was from, I think it was Rescue 3. Cause we had Rescue 3 
guys who were walking up West Street, we gave them a ride up. We rode 'em up, we 
said guys hop on, they hopped on, I don't know what happened after that. I heard later 
on they all got killed. Well, either he was from Rescue 3 or Ladder 43, 1 remember 
seeing a 3 on his hat. A white hat. On the MERV we have all the channels for the fire 
telephone radio, so he started doing command orders or whatever. I don't know what he 
was doing, and we were doing patients. Then the second building collapsed. Again, we 
just ran. 

Q: Were you in motion at that point? 

A: No, actually we stayed on Vessey. 

Q: So you stayed there? 

A: Yeah, we stayed there. Because I believe it was the Verizon Building, I 
don't know if that's on Vessey, cause I remember we started off on Vessey, and then we 
moved under these, like an overlook that goes across from building to building. I don't 
know what it is. 

Q: Like a pedestrian walk? 

A: Like a pedestrian walk. We moved back or forward, I don't remember. 
But then the second building collapsed, and then again we ran. We couldn't see nothing. 
Then we ended up on West and Warren by foot. We left everything there. 



R. SHORT 



Q: So when you first arrived, where did you park the MERV? 

A: Vessey. West and Vessey. 

Q: And that's where it stayed? 

A: Yes. But, oh yeah, here's the pedestrian bridge here, so I was right. We 
parked here in the beginning. Then the second thing collapsed and we got caught in it. 
Then we just started around, I don't remember, just all these people tramping on you 
basically. Then we moved the MERV, I guess it was up to here. 

Q: So just south of the pedestrian bridge? 

A: Yeah. 

Q: Now were you on the river side of West Street, or on the building side? 

A: On the, well at the beginning we were here, on the building side. Then 
when we moved it after the first collapse and everything, we moved over here 
somewhere, so we were near the water. 

Q: So you were on the south side? 

A: Yeah. 

Q: And when the second collapse, where were you then? 

A: Over here. 

Q: You were in the vehicle? 



R. SHORT 



A: Yeah, I was in the vehicle. We were in the vehicle, cause we were seeing 
patients, and then we were in the vehicle. When that came down, everyone just looked 
up and we just ran. I ran this way. 

Q: Did you ever get back to the MERV? 

A: Yeah, I ended up meeting up with the LSU guy, cause I didn't know 
where he was. 

Q: What's his name? 

A: Mark Mazzur. He was actually in here, because he was ahead of me with 
Lieutenant Hadala. So I thought, when I moved the MERV after the first collapse, I 
moved it up here. Cause we got the lights on, people are running and everything. I 
thought they were killed, cause they were over here. That's where the building with 
Chief Carrasquillo and Chief Browne, and everyone was over there. 

Q: Did you see them there? 

A: Well in the beginning, when I pulled up here, I saw their cars. We said 
we're gonna set up here and they went ahead. So I knew they were in the same area here. 
So when the second building, I guess collapsed. . .well, it was the first building collapsed, 
I moved forward, and then the second building collapsed, and that's when I walked over 
here and saw all the debris. That's when I said "I gotta get outta here". I started going 
back to the MERV, and you know, the second building, everything went off. The power 
and everything. So I just went up and started running this way. 



R. SHORT 



Q: North up West Street? 

A: Yeah, and I ended up on I think it was Warren, I think it was over here. 

Q: And who treated patients on the Merv? 

A: It was just me. 

Q: You were the only one, you had no medics, doctors? 

A: I don't' know where anyone was, no. After the initial — it was me and 
Dibriano, but then you know, after that, it literally just blew us out of the MERV. Cause 
we had the back door open with the ramp, and just everything went right out the front. 

Q: Did you ever see Dibriano past that time? 

A: No, I didn't see him till maybe 6, 7 hours later. But I met up with Mark 
Mazzur. Like I said, he went in this way after the first collapse, and I was treating 
patients. He was tying to. . .cause there was a lot of rubble. So I guess he was looking for 
the chief, cause we didn't know where anyone was. Then the second collapse, I left it 
there and I ran this way. That's where I met Mark, I think it was about an hour or two 
later. 

Q: At about Murray and West? Warren? 

A: Yeah, it was up here. They had a, Hazollah — had a big MERV, and they 
were cleaning us up. I had shit in my eyes, and you know. . . 

Q: Did you get any direction from that point? 



R. SHORT 



A: Well from there, the MERV was here. When I met up with Mark, and you 
know, they flushed out our eyes, and we washed out our face, took on a little oxygen and 
stuff. We went back to the scene, me and Mark Mazzur, we went back, got an 
ambulance, jump started the MERV, and got the LSU. Then we set up staging on I guess 
it was this side of Vessey, towards the water. Like right over here. Cause there was still 
a lot of people coming down this way. Also, we met up with Lieutenant Hadala, who lost 
his command car somewhere over here. 

Q: Okay, so you re-located your MERV between North and West Street on 
Vessey? 

A: Yeah, right over here I'd say. Cause this is the water, so. . . 

Q: What ambulance did you use? 

A: Um, I don't know. 

Q: You don't remember where you found it? 

A: No, there was people in it though. 

Q: Did you recognize them? 

A: No, I didn't recognize them, no. 

Q: Was it a Fire Department ambulance? 

A: Yes, Fire Department ambulance. 

Q: Okay 



R. SHORT 



A: They had cables. I said, do you have cables, and they said yes. I gotta get 
this thing outta here, cause of — Then we turned it around and we set up, that's where 
we all kind of grouped together, we were finding people. Then we sort of set up right 
here, cause here's the water, and then we started taking in a lot of patients. 

Q: Civilians? 

A: Mostly civilians at the time, I don't think there were any firefighters. 

Q: What type of injuries? 

A: Eye, smoke, we have the multi-regulators. This MERV can hook up 16 
people at once. Plus we had another 12 multi-regulator, and plus we had 2 more on the 
LSU. So we had I'd say about close to 40 patients just between me and Mazzur. So 
mainly oxygen. 

Q: Okay, and were you able to maintain radio communication? 

A: NO, after the first building collapsed I told them on city-wide "listen 
something's going on, we're getting outta here". They were like "where's the MERV? 
where's the Merv?" I said I left it a long time ago. Then when we came back, we 
couldn't transmit for some reason, I don't know. I guess cause they said the tower had 
the thing on it. But after that, I would say for about 3 Vi hours we couldn't transmit. We 
didn't know where anyone was. 

Q: Did you enter any of the buildings? 



10 



R. SHORT 



A: Did I go in? No, I didn't go in. There was a big pile of rubble, that's about 
it. 

Q: Okay, is there anything else you would like to add, any recollections or 
EMS people you may have seen that you knew, that you can identify? 

A: Lieutenant Remz. . . 

Q: Where did you see him? 

A: Up here somewhere . . . 

Q: That's Warren Street between West and. . . 

A: Yeah, and we ran up here. IT was Lieutenant Rems, Lieutenant 
Santamaria, and they were with the Hotzollah truck. 

Q: And where was that truck parked? 

A: They were parked on West between Warren and Park Place. 

Q: Did they give you any direction? 

A: Well, they were treating me at the time, cause in fact, I had an eye 
infection from it. After that was done, we ran back, seen an ambulance, jump-started the 
MERV, got the LSU, and then we set up over on this side of Vessey near the water. Then 
as the day, we were like all around. We were there for like 25 hours, okay. 

Q: Anything else? 

A: We need respirators like the Fire Department, that's all I have to say. 



11 



R. SHORT 



Q: Okay, I want to thank you for participating in this interview. The time 
now is 11:14, and this concludes the interview. 



File No. 9110091 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMT-P LISA DESENA 
Interview Date: October 16, 2001 



L. DESENA 

MONTE FEILER: Today's date is October 16, 2001. The time now is 10:42, 
and this is Monte Feiler of the Fire Department of the City of New York. I am 
conducting an interview with the following individual. . .please state your name, rank, 
title, and assigned area. 

LISA DESENA: Lisa Desena, paramedic, ALS coordinator, Division 4. 

Q: Of the New York City Fire Department. We're conducting the interview 
in the conference room at Division 4 EMS command center at Queens General Hospital, 
and the interview is regarding the events of September 11, 2001. Go ahead. 

A: Okay, we were in the office when we became aware that the first plane hit. 
There was some confusion as to where we should go. Whether I was supposed to go on 
the MERV. What ultimately happened was we received a phone call from Joe Cahill, the 
Citywide ALS coordinator who instructed me to take a full set of ALS equipment, put it 
on vehicle 833, and come down to Division One. As I was loading the equipment in, 
Lieutenant Maggiore stopped me. He wanted to accompany me. There was also another 
paramedic there, Christopher Lefkidakas. Because I was with Chris, I was able to sign 
out narcotics with the ALS equipment. Lieutenant Maggiore put his equipment on, and 
we proceeded to the incident. Do you want to know which route we ended up taking? 

Q: Sure. 

A: We took the Grand Central Parkway. We went over the Triboro Bridge. 
We came down the FDR Drive. We briefly stopped at Division One to receive 



L. DESENA 

instructions on how to proceed. We continued up the FDR Drive and around the Battery, 
Battery Park. 

Q: Who directed you from Division One? 

A: The ALS Coordinator for Division One. 

Q: Where did she tell you to go? 

A: She gave us a number of locations. She said she didn't really have specific 
instructions. She basically just told us where the staging areas were. So we proceeded 
down, we ended up at the Staten Island Ferry Terminal. This was just right after, I think 
the second tower had just fallen, or was falling at the time. We stopped at the Staten 
Island Ferry Terminal. We unloaded all of our equipment. We set up the triage area, and 
then from there, Lieutenant Maggiore and I went down to Liberty plaza, where we had to 
set up another triage area. One had been set up, but a lot of the people who were there at 
the time were missing or had gone to hospitals. 

Q: Liberty and what? Do you know the cross street? 

A: It was One Liberty Plaza. It was the building right next to the Trade 
Center. I'm not that familiar. . .yeah, it was right there. It was on the corner of Church 
and I guess Liberty. 

Q: Okay. From the time that you got your assignment to the time that you got 
to the fire terminal, if you spoke to anybody was that by a cell phone or by radio? 

A: We spoke to Citywide by radio. I can't remember, Lieutenant Maggiore 
may have also tried by cell phone to get the best route to get to the incident. By the time 



L. DESESNA 



they gave us instructions over the Queensboro Bridge we were already right next to the 
Triboro Bridge. I know there were several academy vehicles, ambulances, behind us. 
Since we were in a command car, we were able to get through and stop traffic so that the 
academy ambulances could follow us. They came the same route we came, but once we 
got on the FDR Drive, I don't know where they ended up. I'm trying to think. . .1 know 
that they had, I think, all the units go to Manhattan South and all the supervisors stay on 
Citywide. Then we were on Citywide. Lieutenant Maggiore had that radio on. The only 
radio I had was the Division radio. I was on the command frequency, 4E. So he really 
had the radio. Like I said, we went to the Staten Island Ferry Terminal, we set up a triage 
area there, saw a number of supervisors at that time. 

Q: EMS Supervisors? 

A: Yes. 

Q: Do you know their names? 

A: Chief Basile, Chief McKracken, Lieutenant Cronin, paramedic Louie 
Cooke was there. Chief Browne was eventually brought in, and his aide Jason Katz. 
Dr.Cherson, Bruce Medjuck, I know there was more, I just have to think. Then we went 
over to Liberty Plaza and the only supervisor on the scene, the only person there was 
Lieutenant Soto. Lieutenant Maggiore and Lieutenant Soto took over command and I 
tried to go inside and set up that triage area. But there were no FDNY people there except 
for me. 



L. DESENA 

There was a number of units from New Jersey, and a lot of doctors were there. There 
were no other FDNY units there. I was the only one there. 

Q: Do you know what departments were there from New Jersey? 

A: Actually no, down at Liberty Plaza was so chaotic that it took a long time 
just to get any semblance of order. The doctors continually kept trying to run down the 
street and go in the hole. Every time they thought there was someone down there. There 
were three different building collapses at that time, so everybody was really running all 
over the place. I honestly don't know who the Jersey units were. I just know there were 
no FDNY units down there at the time. I stayed down there till 6 AM the next morning. 

Q: Did you treat any patients? 

A: We had a number of firemen who came in for exhaustion or dehydration. 
We did have some minor injuries. We had one person pulled out who had been pinned 
down for several hours. But he wasn't there long, cause Dr. Gonzalez — he already had 
blood, an IV. They were giving him blood. They rushed him went to the hospital. 

Q: A civilian? 

A: A civilian, yeah. 

Q: Where did you get the equipment for the triage? 

A: My equipment remained at the Staten Island Ferry Terminal, so when I got 
there, there was equipment there. As time went on, they brought down more stuff. We 



L. DESENA 

would tell them we needed oxygen, bandages, fluids, and it would end up getting 
delivered. At the beginning there wasn't a lot of stuff. I think the doctors brought down 
some stuff with them. So there was some stuff there. It looked like it had been set up 
prior to the building collapsing Then all the people that had staged that, I guess went all 
different places. So we're stuck there, and there was stretchers set up when I got there. 
The people who were originally there weren't there. 

Q: Did you have the opportunity to enter any of the buildings? 

A: Except for Liberty Plaza? That morning? No. I stayed there. I was down 
at the site several times. But because it was so unstable and buildings kept collapsing at 
the time and because there were no other officers there, Lieutenant Maggiore asked me to 
stay there and do triage and transport. Which is what I basically did. 

Q: Did they have ambulances there? 

A: Yes, mostly either the voluntaries or a couple of the volunteers from Long 
Island, and an occasional FDNY unit was there. We didn't have any problem with the 
ambulances. Once we were able to set up a staging area, the ambulances would come in. 
We'd have about 4 or 5 of them there at a time, and as they left we backed up. But that 
wasn't a problem. 

Q: And that was to transport them to the hospital? 

A: Yes. 

Q: So who was transporting the patients to the triage area? 

A: Either firemen or. . . 



L. DESENA 

Q: This was on foot? 

A: Yeah, cause we were that close. We were half a block away from the 
incident. Yeah, the firemen would bring them. The police officers would bring them. 
There were some people at the pile, and occasionally they would bring people back. But 
as I said before, most of the people at that time were FDNY, or uniformed service people 
who had gotten injured, or needed to recline. Most of the walking wounded people had 
left the area. 

Q: Is there anything else that you think is important that you would like to 
add? Any observations? Any other personnel that you may have seen? 

A: No, I don't think so. Anybody else that was down there that'd I've seen 
was accounted for and working today. 

Q: Okay, I would like to thank you on the behalf of the Department for 
participating in this, the time now is 10:52. This concludes this interview. 



File No. 9110092 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMS LIEUTENANT ADAM BRYNES 
Interview Date: October 16, 2001 



Transcribed by Nancy Francis 



A. BRYNES 

MR. RADENBERG: Today's date is October 16th, 
2001. The time is 1244 hours. This is Paul Radenberg 
of the Fire Department of the City of New York. I am 
conducting an interview with Lieutenant Adam -- 

LIEUTENANT BRYNES: Brynes, B-r-y-n-e-s, 
Shield No. 0109. 

MR. RADENBERG: -- assigned to EMS Battalion 
57 of the Fire Department, City of New York. We are 
conducting the interview at EMS Battalion 57 regarding 
the events of September 11th, 2001. 

A. I was assigned as conditions 572 on 9-11-01. 
I received a call from the Brooklyn North dispatcher to 
switch over to Citywide and respond to Manhattan for a 
report of a signal 1040. 

I responded over the Brooklyn Bridge, came 
around by City Hall, noticed an ambulance treating 
approximately five people. At this point Tower 1 was 
engulfed in flames and heavy smoke condition, and the 
ambulance turned out to be 10 William, Tour 2. They 
were treating some soft tissue injuries and some burns 
and some respiratory distress patients, and their 
location was in front of City Hall by -- what street is 
that? Between Park Place and Barclay Street off of 
Centre Street there. 



A. BRYNES 

I was trying to receive additional resources 
for transport of these patients to the nearest 
facility. I had difficulties -- I couldn't raise 
anyone on any of the tactical channels to have any 
further ambulances deployed to me. So I assisted in 
treating these patients with 10 William when we heard a 
loud explosion and noticed Tower No. 2 engulfed in 
flames . 

At that point further attempts to get in 
touch with Citywide or any operations officer at the 
MCI were unsuccessful, at which point I remember Tower 
1 collapsing. I assisted 10 William in getting 
everybody in their ambulance and I directed them to 
transport to the nearest 911 facility. 

At that point I continued down Broadway. I 
reached about Dey Street. I was attempting to get to 
the command post to assist in this incident when I was 
engulfed by tremendous amounts of debris and smoke and 
dust, making any further travel impossible. 

During this time I had numerous people 
banging on my command car for help. I decided that, in 
the best interests of my personal safety, that I would 
egress from that location. Prior to doing so, I exited 
my vehicle and grabbed as many people as I could into 



A. BRYNES 

my command car and then I proceeded to turn around and 
I drove from the location with approximately six people 
in my command car that were all suffering from severe 
trauma. I advised the Citywide dispatcher that I 
needed a place to transport the personnel. The 
dispatcher did not know if any of the treatment areas 
still existed, so at that point I concluded that the 
nearest place I could get to was Beth Israel Hospital, 
and I started transporting those six individuals to the 
hospital. 

At that point I noticed another command car, 
a Fire command car, behind me, trying to get through 
the traffic, and that command car followed me up until 
about 14th Street and Park Avenue, at which point that 
command car died. I went up to the command car and 
found Lieutenant Monroe, who was suffering from acute 
stress regarding this incident, like all of us. She 
had about five people in her command car that were 
suffering from trauma and associated injuries from this 
event . 

I got back on the Citywide frequency and 
requested two ambulances to my location to take care of 
all these people, but after a few minutes I realized 
that the likelihood of receiving an ambulance at that 



A. BRYNES 

time was not going to be expeditious, and in an effort 
to provide the best care I could to these approximate 
eight to ten people, I decided to take Lieutenant 
Monroe and all of the people in her command car in my 
command car, where I transported everyone to Beth 
Israel Hospital. After getting everyone into the 
hospital, I land lined Citywide advising them that I 
had brought Lieutenant Monroe into the hospital and 
about eight civilians and requested further 
instruction . 

At that point I was directed to respond to -- 
what they had at that time was a Battery Park command 
center. I traveled across town from Beth Israel down 
to the West Side Highway. En route down the West Side 
Highway, I noticed a group of EMS personnel and 
ambulances and a Chief and I mistakenly took that to be 
the command center. When I approached the Chief, whose 
name I cannot recall at this time, he told me that he 
would need my assistance gathering the personnel to set 
up a staging area. 

I assisted in that for about 20 minutes, when 
I heard reports of a massive gas leak and there was a 
massive evacuation. I saw numerous people in vehicles 
driving north up the West Side Highway to evacuate the 



A. BRYNES 

immediate area. I was told that there was a massive 
gas leak and that we needed to evacuate. So we 
evacuated all personnel to Chelsea Piers, where a new 
staging area was set up. I assisted in logistics at 
that staging area, at which point I met up with Chief 
Kowalczyk, who requested that I transport him down to 
the command center that was established on West Street 
and Chambers Street at that time. 

I responded down to West Street and Chambers 
Street with Chief Kowalczyk and his aide. I was given 
direction at that point to become a staging officer for 
all extra resource personnel that were sent in, and we 
established a treatment command center at Stuyvesant 
High School auditorium, at which point, sometime later, 
I was directed then to become the transport officer for 
the operation, where I responded to, again, West Street 
and Chambers. 

I assumed transport operations for some 
period of time, several hours. Then I was directed to 
the command post, where I became the recording officer 
for Chief Kowalczyk and Chief McCracken, until about 
2000 hours, at which point I was relieved and I 
retrieved my command car and responded back to 
Battalion 57, where I signed out at 2100 hours on 



A. BRYNES 

09-11-01. 

That basically is my recollection of my 
operations on that date and time. 

Q. The people that you had in your car and that 
Lieutenant Monroe had in her car, as far as you know, 
they were all civilians? 

A. Yes. As far as I knew, they were all 
civilians. I didn't see anyone in any uniform and no 
one at that time identified themselves as being a 
uniformed member of any service. 

Q. When you came down from Beth Israel, you said 
you were coming down the West Side Highway? 

A. Correct. 

Q. Do you remember how far, about how close you 
got to the incident when you came across the Chief 
and -- 

A. I believe that I stopped somewhere maybe 20 
blocks south of Chelsea Piers. If they were named 
streets, I didn't see a name on them. But it was about 
15 blocks south of the Chelsea Piers, about 15 blocks 
south of that. 

Q. What is Lieutenant Monroe's first name? 

A. Amy Monroe. 

Q. Do you know what battalion she's at? 



A. BRYNES 



A. She is Chief Mccracken's aide. 

Q. Do you remember the collapse of the second 
tower? 

A. No. All I remember is that I found out about 
the collapse of the second tower when I got to Beth 
Israel Hospital. 

Q. So immediately after the collapses, the 
collapse of the second tower, you didn't actually make 
it down to the Trade Center complex? 

A. During the collapse of the second tower? 

Q. Yes. 

A. No. 

Q. In that period? 

A. No. Because I got stopped, you know, I was 
coming down West Side Highway and I got stopped there 
before I got down any further. By the time I got back 
to the command center with Chief Kowalczyk, No. 2 
building had collapsed. There were massive fires 
everywhere, so we weren't allowed to go south of 
Chambers Street at that time. 

I do remember seeing the collapse of 6 World 
Trade Center. Was it 6 or -- I think it was 6. Did 6 
drop? It was one of them, 6 or 3 or 7. I just 
remember watching the collapse of another building at 



A. BRYNES 



that time and that got us pretty nervous because there 
was, again, a big smoke-like cloud coming towards us 
and I just remember everyone at the command center 
running for cover until after that blew over. But 
that's the only other building I saw collapse. I think 
it was No. 6. I think, I'm not sure, but I think it 
was No. 6. Somebody told me it was No. 6 that had 
collapsed . 

That's the best I can remember it. It was 
without a doubt a very hectic and totally uncontrolled 
environment. But that's what I can recollect. 

Q. When you first got into Manhattan, you met up 
with 10 Willie? 

A. Correct. 

Q. Are they a Fire unit or voluntary? 

A. They're a private, voluntary unit. 

Q. Do you remember what hospital they're from? 

A. I'd like to say New York Hospital, but I 
can't be sure. 

Q. Okay. 

A. Tony Brooks was one of the paramedics. I 
remember him because I used to work with him as a medic 
before he left EMS. 

Q. From the time that you were with 10 Willie 



10 

A. BRYNES 



until you started to transport up to Beth Israel and 
found that Lieutenant Monroe was behind you, did you 
see any other Department personnel? 

A. No, not that I can recall. 

Q. Any other thoughts or comments that you'd 
like to add? 

A. No. I'd just be interested in going over the 
post-MCI critique about the incident. I've had some 
concerns regarding communication ability during 
something like this. I felt that something can be done 
in the future to allow us a better communication 
capability when something this big happens. I'm not 
saying that anything necessarily failed in this case, 
but I think that something could definitely be improved 
on to probably help our ability to perform our job. 
That's about it. 

MR. RADENBERG: Okay. The time is now 1301 
hours and the interview is concluded. 



File No. 9110093 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMT MICHAEL OBER 
Interview Date: October 16, 2001 



M. OBER 

CHRISTOPHER ECCLESTON: Today's date is October 16, 2001. My name 
is Christopher Eccleston of the New York City Fire Department. I am conducting an 
interview with the following individual... please state your name, rank, assigned 
command area of the Fire Department of the City of New York regarding the events of 
September 11, 2001. 

MICHAEL OBER: My name is Michael Ober, I am an EMT with the New 
York City Fire Department. I am currently assigned to Division 3 in Brooklyn. 

Q: Mike, were you working on September 11 th , the day of the World Trade 
Center disaster? 

A: Yes, I was. 

Q: And were you assigned to the World Trade Center disaster? 

A: Yes, I was. 

Q: In your own words, can you please tell me about the events of that day? 

A: Um, the morning of the 11 th , I was in the office, I am currently assigned to 
Chief Kowalcyk. He was up here in the office, and he called down to me, "get the car 
ready". I said why? He said a plane crashed into the Twin Towers. I didn't really believe 
him at first. Then on the way out the door, one of the people who works here turned the 
TV on and we could see the towers burning. I said all right. I didn't think it was going 
to be so massive. I thought it was a Cessna or something like that. I had no idea it was 
going to be a 767. So I ran downstairs, got the car ready, we started to leave. I don't 



M. OBER 

know what road we were on, but I could see a nice picture of the city skyline. You saw 
the towers right in front of you, and the first tower was hit. I couldn't tell at first if it was 
papers or birds, but something white was you know, like flickering up in the sky. It just 
seemed weird. But anyway, we got into Manhattan. The Chief was trying to prepare us 
for everything. He said, "y° u know, just get ready, this may be a bad day. You might 
see a lot of dead people. You might see a lot of bad things". He was also saying that, just 
be prepared, cause it might be a terrorist act. At this point we still had no idea what was 
going on. We just heard that a plane hit the Twin Towers. He said, "be ready for 
secondary explosives". Just, you know, stuff like that, just trying to give me an idea of 
what he wants me to do when we get down there. We got out of the tunnel. Do you want 
this to be really descriptive, or do you just want to know. . .? 

Q: Absolutely, sure, as descriptive as possible. 

A: We were coming down what I believe is West Street, and the Chief says, 
what is that in the road up there? We just saw a pile sitting there, had no idea what it 
was. But we came closer, and found out it was body parts. We turned back the car, I 
have no idea exactly where, to be honest, I can't remember the street. We started 
walking to the building, I believe the building we walked into was the South Tower, I'm 
just not sure. But it was where the fire command post was, whichever building the fire 
command post was in, that's where we went. We walked into there, on the way into the 
building, there was people running around, people that was jumping landing on the 
grounds. Whatever building we walked into there was a glass canopy, foyer type thing 



M. OBER 

where from the street you can see into the building. As we were walking into the 
building, we just heard a huge bang. As we looked up, it was someone who had jumped, 
god knows how far up. We got into the lobby of the building and it was like chaos, there 
were people everywhere. Once we got in there, I don't remember exactly who it was, I 
think it was one of the fire Chiefs who said "you know it's not safe, we gotta get 
outside". So we left to go outside, and as we stepped out of the building, it was like, 
raining people. People were just jumping from everywhere. Just all over it was bodies 
and parts just scattered. We walked across, I believe it was West Street, and we set up 
the command post over there next to the fire command post, just trying to get everything 
in order. At the same time we're trying to watch to see what's going on. The only thing 
that was going on was you could see the buildings burning and people just jumping. You 
could watch them fall from like the 90 th floor all the way down. It's like you go to school 
for so long to be able to take of people and treat them and be able to fix them when 
there's something wrong with them, and there's nothing, they hit the ground, and that's it. 
I saw one guy got split in half by a light post, his torso and his legs weren't together. 
You just feel helpless, there's nothing you can do. So we're sitting there trying to set up 
the command board. I really don't know how long we're there for, to be honest, I have 
no idea. Then we heard a rumble, some twisting metal, we looked up in the air, and to be 
totally honest, at first, I don't know exactly. . .but it looked to me just like an explosion. It 
didn't look like the building was coming down, it looked like just one floor had blown 
completely outside of it. I was sitting there looking at it. I just never thought they would 



M. OBER 

ever come down, so I didn't think they were coming down. I just froze and stood there 
looking at it. Then I saw everybody running past me and I said, I better start running. I 
turned around, luckily there's a parking garage behind us. We ran into the parking 
garage, and right before I got into the parking garage, I turned around and I could see the 
debris starting to come down. 

Q: When you say we were running, can you tell me who else was in this 
group that was running? 

A: Well, the command post was set up, I believe it was right on the sidewalk 
directly across the street, and directly behind us was like a driveway into a parking 
garage. The command post in front was myself, Chief Kowalcyk. There was either a 
Lieutenant or a Captain from Manhattan, one of the EMS officers. Then it was either 
directiy to our left, or just a little behind us was the fire command post. Chief Ganci was 
there, Commissioner Feehan, all the guys who didn't make it out were standing right over 
there. 

Q: How far from you were they? 

A: Five, ten feet max. Then behind us, there was just lots of firefighters, I 
can't even begin to tell you how many. There was some cops back there, a lot of 
firefighters. They had all their gear sitting there, I guess they were just waiting for 
orders, just sitting there. After hearing this and looking up and seeing the building, what 
I thought was an explosion, everyone was running, I turned around and decided that I 
should probably take off like everybody else. So when I got to the entrance, I turned 



M. OBER 

around and saw the debris coming down. I didn't know if I was gonna die or get trapped. 
I was just like, I kept thinking, I don't want to be alone. I need to find somebody. I went 
into the parking garage, I made it about 5 feet. I saw some firefighter up against the wall, 
he was on the ground right close to the wall. I just jumped on this guy's back, I had no 
idea who he was. I said, are you all right? He was just like, yeah buddy, are you all 
right? Yeah, I'm fine. Just as he said that, a huge gust of wind just started coming down. 
It wasn't like huge chunks of debris, but it was a lot of dust, you know, just dust, it might 
have been ash too. But it was pitch black. We just layed there till it stopped coming 
down, then we finally got back up, it probably had to be inches of just stuff on top of 
everything. It had to be probably like six inches of dust and all kinds of stuff. After it 
stopped coming down, I finally got up, and thought we gotta get outta here. We got up. 
We're trying to figure out where we were. It seemed like a movie, it was just like guys in 
fire companies were screaming out their company numbers. I think it was 16, I'm not 
sure. But I remember just hearing someone in the background screaming 16, where are 
you? It didn't seem— I just felt like I was in a movie. So myself and this firefighter, I 
have no idea who it is, decide that we're gonna walk towards this entrance where we 
came in. We walked, and I'm like, we're stuck. He said, no we're not at the entrance 
yet. Somebody says no, you're outside. I'm like we're not outside, it's dark out. He said 
look at the air, there's so much stuff in the air, no sunlight's getting through. The amount 
of stuff that was in the air, you couldn't see it. It was like a curtain of just dust that 
blocked out all the sunlight. Breathing was horrible, it was just ash and dust. Every time 



M. OBER 

I took a breath, I could feel more of it going into me. You try covering up your mouth, 
but it was still getting in. Cause it was just so thick in the air, it was hard to see 10 feet 
by you. It was horrible. There was just gear everywhere. I had no idea where I was, I 
had no idea how I was getting out. I somehow stumbled over a Scoot Pack and picked it 
up, just in case. I never used it, but I just picked it up and brought it just in case I needed 
to use it. We found out we were outside. At first you really couldn't see anything, it was 
just dark. Then after that, we were just looking for people, anything around us that we 
would know, that could get us out. Someone that could help, it was just confusion at 
first. I didn't know what to do, where to go, who to help, who to look for or anything. 
Then the air started to settle down a little bit, and some of the air was coming through, 
and it felt like I was looking at a black and white TV. Everything was a shade of gray. 
Everybody around me was just covered in gray. I saw a fire engine that was just 
completely destroyed, and it was just gray. Every fire engine was just a different shade 
of gray. It was just crazy. Actually, with all the devastation that was going on, that was 
the real cool thing to see. I don't know why, it was just really interesting. It was just like 
I said, it was like a black and white TV. 

Q: At this point, did you know where your partner Chief Kowalcyk was? 

A: No. I had no idea. 

Q: The last time you saw him was at the command post? 

A: Once I finally got situated, and got a hold of myself, I realized what was 
going on. I started looking for him. After a couple minutes of looking for him, another 



M. OBER 

Chief's aide, who I don't know his name, I know his face, he came over to me and said 
where's your Chief? I had no idea. He's said where's your Chief? I said I don't know. 
We started walking around looking for him. I don't even know how long we looked for 
him, time was just a big blur. We didn't find him anywhere, we went back into the 
parking garage, we couldn't find him in the parking garage. We walked down to the 
corner and both of our Chiefs were standing there together. We started heading down the 
block to get to the Chiefs. 

Q: Who was the other Chief who was with Chief Kowalcyk, do you know? 

A: I'm not sure. . .sorry. I can't remember. 

Q: No, no, it's alright. 

A: Just as we got to the Chiefs, the rumbling started again, and it was just like 
a sound I'll never forget. Days afterwards I heard a rumbling noise and I was hiding. 
You knew what was happening, we turned around and the second building was coming 
down. So we took off running again, and I don't know what building it was, sorry I don't 
really know the area very well. . . 

Q: It's fine, it's fine. 

A: I just found a safe area, so I didn't care what street it was. We ran behind 
this building, and had shelter in that building. People were just coming in. They let 
people in the doors. Then from there, for a while I don't know what happened. I know 
we left the building, we found an ambulance crew and we told the driver that we had to 
set up some kind of staging. Set up some kind of triage, we had to get some kind of 



M. OBER 

order. We figured the best way to do that was to take a step back. So Chief Kowalcyk 
said take them down to Chelsea Piers. He figured it was a big area, they had a lot of big 
open rooms in there. If need be we could make it into a make-shift hospital, or a triage 
area. We took a ride down there. I don't even remember how long we were down there 
for. I just remember flying through the streets of Manhattan, going down there. When 
we got down there, it was just like, go down to the end, there was a little cobblestone 
driveway. It was maybe like 2 cars wide, maybe a little bit bigger than that. Then there's 
like a main road, you just go to the end of the driveway. He just told me to switch any 
ambulance that shows up over to the command frequency. Keep the driver in the car, tell 
them don't leave the ambulance. He just had a lot of orders. Write down the unit 
number. I went down to the end and the ambulances just started showing up from 
everywhere. Ambulance companies that I had never even heard of before. People just 
from everywhere were showing up. There had to be hundreds of ambulances lined up 
there. I had ambulances show up, and all I had to do was write down what kind of crew 
they were, whether it was a BLS crew, an ALS crew. Whether they had you know, two 
people or ten. The ambulances would show up and I'm like well, what's your crew? 
They'd be like, well it's myself, my partner, we're both EMTs. I have five doctors, and 
four nurses in the back. There was so many people. So many people with so much 
training and so much knowledge. These amazing skills that they could treat these people 
with, but there was no patients. We had all kind of medically trained people there and 
nobody to take care of. We had ambulances just lined up, and everybody's getting 



10 
M. OBER 

frustrated cause they know what's going on. It's like everybody who came out here who 
had bumps and bruises. Or they didn't come out, they were dead. There was really 
nothing that anyone could do down there, so they were getting frustrated. Then I just, I 
don't even know. . .time was just a blur, I don't remember what time it was. There was a 
rumor about a gas leak going on down there, and about 2 minutes after this rumor of the 
gas leak, Chief Kowalcyk calls me on the radio and says we're going back down there. I 
remember getting down there, that's about it. I don't remember exactly what we did once 
we got down there. It was weird, it was probably the most devastating thing I've ever 
seen in my life, and so much of it I can't remember. I don't remember where I parked the 
car, you know, I don't remember the people that I saw. I saw so many people, and it's 
like, a lot of them I know by face, and I will never forget faces. But I don't know names. 
Both people that I work with, and both victims that I saw parts from were like, someone's 
face that I saw them jump, and they landed 5 feet from me. I don't remember the sound 
of the building hitting the ground. Somebody told me that it was measured on the Richter 
scale, I don't know how true that is. If the building is hitting the ground that hard, how 
do I not remember the sound of it? The smell was just — it has a distinct smell. I've 
been to Manhattan many times since then, and that smell just brings back every single. . .1 
don't know if it's like World Trade Center cement. I don't know what exactly it is. It's 
just that like, the smell that we inhaled so many times with the rest of the dust and 
everything in the parking garage. It's just a nasty smell. I mean, it's not that bad, but I 



11 
M. OBER 

just don't like the smell. Um, I don't know. . .we were down there, there was rumors 
about the other stuff going on. But nobody had definite information. 

Q: About what other stuff? 

A: One rumor I heard was that they were taking out the tunnels, which 
seemed pretty damn scary considering we took the tunnel on the way over here. 

Q: The Brooklyn Battery Tunnel? 

A: The Brooklyn Battery, there you go. The Brooklyn Battery Tunnel. Then 
we heard about the Pentagon. Somebody also said the Sear's Tower was hit. That's 
about it as far as I know. People were just talking. You didn't know what was true and 
what was not true, you know? I remember standing on, I think it was on West Street, and 
it was the first plane I had heard in awhile. I started flipping out. I turned around and 
I'm looking at the Empire State Building, and I'm like, it's gone. All I heard was the 
rumbling of an airplane, and I'm like, they're taking out the Empire State Building too. 
It was some kind of F-15 or something came like, screaming over our heads. That was the 
greatest thing I saw all day long. I'm like, they're not hitting us with anymore planes. 
It's just like I said, a lot of the stuff I'll be getting here and there. It's all bits and pieces. 

Q: Is there anything else that you feel you want to add to this interview? 
Anything at all? 

A: Sure, I probably should have said, or told you about. I know this is just a 
personal feeling, but the amount of devastation that was going on down there, it's just 
unbelievable the number of people who came out. When I was down at Chelsea Piers 



12 
M. OBER 

lining up the ambulances, I had people coming up to me who wanted to just do 
something. Someone was like, I'm a retired Vietnam veteran. I can help you know. I'm, 
used to this kind of situation. What can I do to help? There were people everywhere, 
"I'm a lawyer", and you see them out there directing traffic. They tried so much to bring 
us down, whoever did this. It's just not gonna happen, you know? It's just so many 
awesome people out there. Just the way everybody's doing the job, it's unbelievable. This 
city, I'm proud of where I work. 

Q: You should be. You have good reason to be proud. Well Mike, I thank 
you very much for conducting this interview with me. This interview is being concluded 
at 11:02. The counter on the cassette player is 313. 



File No. 9110094 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMT-P ERIC RODRIGUEZ 
Interview Date: October 16, 2001 



E. RODRIGUEZ 



MIKE TAMBASCO: Today is October 16, my name is Mike Tambasco, 

assigned to the World Trade Center Task Force. I'm conducting an interview into the 
events of September 11 th at the World Trade Center. The interview today is with 
paramedic Eric Rodriguez, who is assigned to Unit 35 Zebra, tour 2. We are in the 
Battalion 57 locker room. Alright, Eric. 

ERIC RODRIGUEZ: My name is Eric Rodriguez, I'm a paramedic 

assigned to 35 Zebra 2. On the morning of September 11 th , my partner and I, Joel Pierce 
went over to Carl's Place, a little deli over on Union and North 8 th where we get our 
breakfast every morning, cause it's right around our 89, and it's really relaxing. As we 
were sitting down eating, all of a sudden we heard a lot of Brooklyn units getting 
switched to Citywide. A lot of 31 Units down by the Brooklyn Bridge. So we looked at 
each other and said wow, something must be going on, let's see if we can, you know, 
something good to buff. So we switched over to citywide and we started hearing all these 
reports about we have fire showing at the World Trade Center, explosion. So we go 
woah, so we drove over to Kent Avenue and as we got around Kent and North 6 th , we 
could see that the North Tower had been struck. I didn't know what it was. I mean, the 
plumes of smoke were coming, and I remember getting on the phone and calling my wife 
and my mother saying turn on the television. There's a hole in the World Trade Center. 
So now at this point, my partner is calling Citywide, telling them we're an ALS haz-tac, 



E. RODRIGUEZ 

we can be over the bridge in 5 minutes. You know, put us on the job. Cause at this point 
we had also heard the MCI code for an airplane crash. So we're thinking haz-tac, we can 
get there and really get in on the job. We couldn't get out on the phones and we're trying 
to get through on the radio, but not stepping on anybody. As we're standing there 
watching the buildings is when the second plane hit. It was then that we realized that this 
was not just a fire. That whole feeling just like, your stomach dropped out. At that point, 
we got on the radio and said 35 Zebra, we're going. We had our Sargent from the 90 
Precinct, was down there. He had already got —cleared traffic for us straight down 
Broadway to the Willie B. I remember going across the Willamsburg Bridge, I looked at 
my partner and said brother, no matter what happens, we go home alive tonight. Cause 
even then we were thinking there's got to be very heavy patient care. But who else 
knows what's going on. When we first got into Manhattan over the Willie B, we got 
directed over to Canal down to Broadway. We were coming down Broadway past City 
Hall, and it was pandemonium. There was all kind of resources over here, we're trying to 
look for some kind of EMS command post. There were crowds of people over here, we 
wound up coming down, coming across over here. There was wreckage everywhere, and 
there were body parts. 

Q: So you came across West on Vessey Street? 

A: Yeah, and there was nothing but, it was absolutely like Berlin 1944, 45. 
We couldn't get across over here because there was too much debris, it didn't look too 
safe. We didn't see too much trucks or apparatus. So we came down here. 



E. RODRIGUEZ 



Q: You came down Church Street going south. 

A: Then we had to divert back over this way, cause we couldn't, there was 
too much debris. You know the stairs that's over here, across from the hotel that's 
usually over here? 

Q: Right, right. 

A: There was far too much stuff here, and there were body parts in the street. 
We didn't want to run over them, so I came back across over here on this little street, I 
guess that's Dey. 

Q: Dey Street, you went over east, right? 

A: We got back to Broadway, then we started, we lit it up again and went all 
the way down Broadway. 

Q: Southbound on Broadway, right. 

A: We started picking up all these ambulances. They just started jumping in 
line behind us. We came down across by the Brooklyn Battery Tunnel, and got over to 
West Street, and just headed back up. 

Q: Right, up north. 

A: Up north. Now at Liberty, we saw a command vehicle with an EMS 
officer standing at Liberty and West Street. So we figured that's where it was. I was 
listening to the radio, I was hearing Chief Goldfarb on the radio. I know his incident 
command is second to none. So I figured that's where he was, and I pretty much trust a 



E. RODRIGUEZ 



lot of his decisions. Okay, we're here, we're haz-tac, what do you want us to do? Well, 
it turns out he wasn't there. But there was a captain, I forget who he was, but he was 
newly promoted, a kind of heavyset guy. 

Q: Captain D'amato maybe? 

A: Maybe. We're like, where do you want us? He said, give me a second, I 
just got here, this isn't a command post as far as I know. But at this point we're standing 
there talking to him and other busses are going around us and starting to line up behind 
his command vehicle. It also looked like PD was setting up a command post right there, 
they had a lot of units in plainclothes. Apparatus were still showing up, so we initially 
started staging right underneath that little walkway that goes across. . . 

Q: That goes across West Street? 

A: No, Liberty. This one right here. 

Q: Got you. 

A: That's when we started noticing that people were jumping on that side. At 
first I said look out, there's debris falling. We looked up and said no, that's not debris, 
those are bodies. We're thinking bodies from the fire floors. Then we started seeing they 
were screaming and they were moving, and we were watching them hit the ground. At 
that point there's nothing you can do to treat them. You know we might need to move 
back cause they're gonna start taking some of us out. So we moved back here where 
South End and Liberty meet. 



E. RODRIGUEZ 



Q: West, where South End, right. 

A: We started staging over here, they wanted us down on South End. They 
told us listen, you guys are haz-tac. We have about 2 or 3 of your haz-tac units here. 
What we want to do is, we want you to stay up close here because we're gonna 
consolidate you guys, you're gonna Scott up, you're gonna go up and do searches. 

Q: Do you remember who told you that? Was it an EMS captain? 

A: There was a captain. No, there wasn't cause I had to tell the captain. Who 
was it? It was a chief said it, I don't remember what chief was there. 

Q: Okay, fine. 

A: Cause it wasn't Chief Goldfarb, cause I know his aide. It was someone I 
didn't know. It might have been Chief Wells, I'm really not sure. 

Q: Okay. 

A: Cause at this point I hadn't actually physically seen any of the chiefs, but I 
was hearing them on the radio. I was hearing Brynes on the radio, so I was trying to get a 
sense of where everybody was. I knew there was a command center inside, there was a 
forward triage. I was thinking I don't see too many medics here, I see a lot of EMTs. So 
me and my partner are like we gotta get in, at least maybe we can do something over 
there. So we're standing there, and we're hearing the reports, patients with major burns 
and all that. My partner says listen, I want to go find out what's going on. So he starts 
walking over towards West Street and Liberty and South. I was on the corner of Liberty 



E. RODRIGUEZ 



and South End Street. I went into the back of the truck and started hanging trauma lines. 
I figured if we get a burn victim or whatever, we're prepared. I don't know how much 
time went by. I know I slipped out of the truck for a minute and then Chief McCracken 
was there, and I think it was Chief Grant was there. I remember Chief McCracken saying 
chief Grant is taking over, he's assuming command of this sector right here. Anybody 
needs directions, I want all the drivers to stay with the vehicles and everybody else to 
come over by Chief Grant. Well my partner was already over there, and I was driving 
that day. So I figured well, I'll finish hanging all the trauma lines. I was in back of the 
vehicle and I heard, it sounded like I thought another plane had struck the building. This 
loud bang and then it sounded like a locomotive, or like when I used to live in Howard 
Beach, when the planes used to come in at night, flying right over the house. Everything 
started shaking and I heard like a thunderstorm. Somebody screamed it's coming down. 
I don't remember if it was on the radio, because the side door of the bus was open. The 
back door of the truck~I could see out of. I looked, and I bent all the way down to look 
up as far as I could, and I could see the cloud coming. I thought the building was actually 
falling over. I didn't know it was pan-caking. I was like, I'm not getting out of here. So 
I dove on the floor of the truck. I was praying, if something hits this bus, don't let it 
collapse the box. If it does, I hope there's a big enough void that I'll be alright. I 
remember something hit the bus hard enough that my siren went off. Then the siren died. 



E. RODRIGUEZ 

So the siren went off and then it died. It was pitch black, and I heard the May Days come 
across. I couldn't breathe, you know. 

Q: Can you remember anyone specific you heard on the May Days? 

A: No, I just heard someone say May Day, May Day. We are pinned, we are 
pinned, like that. People stepping on each other. I remember hearing Central say units, 
calm down, you know— of that nature. I was suffocating and then I realized that. . .and 
then I remembered that we had Scott packs. There was a piece of metal that was like, 
wedged in the doorway. I grabbed my mask, I was able to get the metal out of the way, 
and the soot and stuff was about halfway up the side of the bus. So I was able to dig 
through that, get to the compartment, and get my Scott pack on. I thought I was actually 
under a debris or something, and I'm thinking whatever's on top of me I hope isn't a fire 
part. Cause I don't want this to just collapse and then you know, fry and all that. As it 
started to filter down, I'm thinking, where the hell is my partner? There was a Lincoln 
Navigator that was right next to the bus, that when I went to step in, I had to move the 
door cause it wouldn't open all the way. It was gone, I mean it wasn't. . .it was gone. 
There were a couple of ambulances that were completely totaled. You know the 
Hottzollah MERV that they had up there was completely flat. As it was clearing up, I 
could see more and more of the apparatus that were there completely destroyed or gone. 
Then I don't remember seeing anybody move, it was dead silent and it was like being on 
the surface of the moon. Cause all I could hear was the Scott pack, you know? So I'm 
looking, I'm looking and I ran into Timmy Keller, from Batallion Fifty. 



E. RODRIGUEZ 



He was kind of standing up, he looked a little dazed and I said Timmy, are you alright? 
And he goes, I can't find Karen, Karen DeShore. I said, where was she? She was right 
next to me before everything happened. He said, I jumped under the car, I can't find her. 
I said, well have you seen anyone else? He said no. So now I'm still looking for my 
partner. I finally found Joel, he was having a hard time breathing. I said, lets go get your 
Scott pack and get out of here. He says no, we got to go back to the first tower and start 
digging. I said listen, if this one came down, the other one's probably gonna come down. 
Trust me, turn around, get on my ass, we'll get out of the area. If they say it's not gonna 
come down, we'll come back. Until such time, we need to get out of here. When we got 
back to the truck, he got his Scott pack on. The vehicle was dead, it wouldn't move, I 
think one of my rear axles was busted too. The vehicle was dead. We started hearing on 
the radio, all units within the vicinity of the World Trade Center, you need to evacuate 
the immediate area because the North Tower is beginning to lean. So, we started hoofing 
it, and we found another crew was there. They had no stretcher in their bus. There was 
this paramedic, and I know I've seen him, but I can't remember if I've seen him in 
Manhattan or from when I worked in the Bronx. 

Q: One of our units? 

A: One of our guys. I said, does that truck run? He said absolutely, 
everybody get on. So we jumped in the back right as the North Tower collapsed. 



10 



E. RODRIGUEZ 



South End is not a very big street, but he was flying down that street and that cloud was 
coming. It looked like we were parked. We got to the end of South End Street, by that 
building over there, and they had all those boats, they were trying to get people on them. 
That's when the second cloud came. I got separated from my partner at that time again, 
so while we were standing there, I'll never forget it. It seemed to be just completely 
disorganized, and people were like, let's just help these people to the boats and all that. 
The paramedic who was driving that rig turned around and said listen, get a pen and a 
paper, we need to start writing down who's here. I'm assuming command of this area. 
We started doing that, and I told him, I'm gonna go find my partner. He was like, I wish 
you'd stay here, and I was like, well, no. I finally found him. We made our way down to 
South Ferry, and we met Chief McCracken. Then we wound up going over to Liberty 
Street. Not Liberty Street, Joel went back to Liberty Street, I stayed down in South Ferry. 
Where I met him, he was on the north side of everything when it happened. 

Q: Anything else you want to add to it, Eric? 

A: Nothing else. That's about it. 

Q: Thank you. This interview concludes at 13:13. By the way, it began at 
12:58. 



File No. 9110095 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMS CHIEF WALTER KOWALCZYK 
Interview Date: October 16, 2001 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



W. KOWALCZYK 2 

MR. TAMBASCO: Today is October 16th. 
My name is Mike Tambasco, assigned to the 
World Trade Center Task Force. The time is 
10:47 a.m. I am in the office of Chief 
Walter Kowalczyk in the Battalion 58 
building. We will be doing an interview 
into the events of September 11th at the 
World Trade Center. 

Q. Chief, if you would just be good enough 
to tell me in your own words what happened. 

A. On the morning of the 11th, I started 
my tour of duty at approximately 5:30 in the 
morning. I was in my division office. I was 
also scheduled to be, for the date of the 11th, 
the citywide EMS chief. What that means is that 
for the 24-hour period starting at 8 a.m. on the 
11th and terminating at 8 a.m. on the 12th, I am 
the ranking EMS officer responsible for EMS 
activities . 

I was sitting in my office doing my 
work. I always monitor the fire scanner as well 
as the EMS dispatch frequencies. At which point 
a second alarm came over on the Brooklyn fire 
frequency. Brooklyn fire transmitted a second 



W. KOWALCZYK 3 

alarm for the World Trade Center. I immediately 
turned the fire scanner to the Manhattan 
frequency, and there was a report of a plane into 
the Trade Center. 

At that point I advised my staffer to 
get an overview of division operations. I'm 
responsible on a day-to-day basis for EMS 
Division 3, which is approximately 700 people and 
about 65 ambulances at peak shift. 

As I was preparing to leave, there was 
a TV on in the other room that had a live shot of 
this. I realized going out that this is probably 
something fairly major. However, in my mind I 
thought it was probably a small plane into the 
Trade Center. 

My aide Michael Ober and myself 
responded to the Trade Center. The best access 
route that we took was the Prospect Expressway 
into the Gowanus . As we approached on the 
Gowanus, the enormity of the situation was live 
in front of us. And there was not much we could 
do because we were facing some heavy traffic. 

I remember turning to my aide and 
saying we need to use caution going into this, 



W. KOWALCZYK 4 

looking at the enormity of the situation. From a 
safety perspective I was also concerned that this 
could be terrorism. I have taken a good number 
of courses in preparation for the medical aspects 
of bioterrorism. 

We were stuck in traffic for a little 
bit, and then traffic started to move. It 
appeared that the Police Department had very 
quickly put some traffic patterns into place to 
pull emergency traffic through the Brooklyn 
Battery Tunnel. 

As soon as we came through the Brooklyn 
Battery Tunnel, the devastation was almost 
immediate. In my career I have managed many 
multiple-casualty incidents from plane crashes to 
severe train derailments, so managing high-scale 
incidents never scared me. 

However, as you're driving down West 
Street and you have to maneuver the vehicle to 
avoid driving over what appeared to be body parts 
as well as debris, my mouth went dry. I had the 
sensation that I had a job to do. I had to 
ensure the safety of the EMS work force. But how 
do I do this if I can't talk? 



W. KOWALCZYK 5 

I asked somebody for a -- so we parked 
our car and came down West Street. There was no 
clearly defined staging area at that point in 
time. It was a fairly chaotic event. And at 
that point the only thing that was evident was 
fire from at least one of the towers. 

We positioned our vehicle on Liberty 
Street between West Street and North End. I 
pulled my safety gear out and my portable radio 
and we took a command board. That was the last 
time I was to see my vehicle in an upright 
position. 

We proceeded north on West Street, 
trying to find the command post. In most 
incidences to find the command post is very clear 
and evident. However, at this point in time it 
was not clear and evident. We found some 
officials to say that the command post was in the 
lobby of One World Trade Center, which is the 
north tower. 

Q. The north tower. 

A. I think the most devastating or one of 
the most devastating views I had was as we were 
entering Two World Trade Center there was a torso 



W. KOWALCZYK 6 

on the ground. It looked to me a little like a 
CPR mannequin. But I had to focus to keep going. 

Debris was coming down around us. We 
entered Two World Trade Center through a 
shattered window. We found Chief Gombo, who was 
the ranking EMS officer on the scene. I remember 
seeing Chief Peter Hayden from the Fire 
Department there. 

At that point they indicated we needed 
to move the command post. There was a report of 
another plane coming. In retrospect, knowing the 
events that had occurred, I'm not sure if that 
was the second plane that was coming or the 
second plane had already come and now 
intelligence was starting to develop and maybe 
there was a third plane inbound. 

We moved quickly but cautiously outside 
and started to establish a command post in the 
driveway in front of Two World Financial Center, 
which is on West Street, basically midpoint 
between the intersections of Vesey and Liberty 
Street . 

At that point a formal command post of 
fire officials started to develop, including 



W. KOWALCZYK 7 

First Deputy Commissioner Feehan and Chief of 
Department Peter Ganci . I think Chief Ray Downey 
was there. Chief Gombo came over. 

Basically I started to assume the 
responsibility of the EMS operations chief. I 
started to, in the midst of the chaos, establish 
some type of infrastructure for the EMS 
operations. I remember deploying chiefs and 
officers to Vesey and West and to Liberty and 
West with global direction of trying to set up 
operation there. 

It was very difficult to concentrate, 
given the enormity of the situation. Probably 
the most emotional piece was when we saw the 
bodies coming off the Trade Center. Now, I'm not 
talking about one or two bodies. We had to have 
watched between 10 and 20 bodies come down. I 
will never forget the sound of those bodies 
hitting the ground. 

I believe it's the front of One World 
Trade Center, it's structured in a manner that 
has a glass canopy over the driveway. Again, my 
recollection could be wrong. It could be either 
that or Three World Trade Center. It was one of 



W. KOWALCZYK 8 

the buildings on West Street. I believe it was 
One World Trade Center. 

The bodies were coming down and going 
through those plate glasses. The sound -- if you 
ever heard sounds of plywood dropping on the 
ground, just that force, it was multiplied. I 
thought I was at an event at Universal Studios, 
on the side, watching a movie being taped. But 
this was no movie. It was real life, and it was 
moving in slow motion. 

There were some thoughts or words of 
people that you just can't forget. I'm sure it 
wasn't the last words that Chief Ganci said, but 
I remember words such as "oh, shit, those 
bastards." That's the last words I ever heard 
Chief Ganci say. 

We were trying to get a handle on 
running the EMS operation when suddenly what 
appeared to be in slow motion was a humongous 
black cloud starting to descend from the sky. 
That black cloud was, later I realized, the 
collapsing of I believe the north tower. In 
retrospect, it happened in slow motion, but yet 
it happened so quickly. I don't remember which 



W. KOWALCZYK £ 

one it was . 

We turned, and we ran down this 
driveway. As I'm running down this driveway, I 
probably said why am I doing this? Why am I 
running down a driveway into a parking garage 
that would be a natural flow for debris? Again, 
in my mind I had been to building collapses, and 
building collapses usually come down at an angle. 



|two fantastic children. As I was 
running, I wasn't sure if I would ever see them 
again . 

We ran into this garage along with 
Chief Gombo, Lieutenant Terranova and members of 
the Police Department and firefighting 
operations. I believe Commissioner Fitzpatrick 
was with us along with emergency service 
officers. I thought we were going to die. 

A haze was starting to develop. We 
could not see the driveway. That was black. I 
wasn't sure if the haze that was developing was a 
smoke condition starting to impact us or the 
debris . 



W. KOWALCZYK 10 

I heard a fire officer scream: 18, 
where are you? It was either 18 or 16 -- 18 or 
16 Truck, where are you? It seemed like a scene 
from Backdraft where they're trying to recall 
their members. But this was no movie; this was 
live . 

Then we were all scared. There was 
probably 15, 20, 30 people with us in the garage. 
Chief Gombo was coughing, and I was concerned 
about him. We were all covered with soot. I 
wasn't sure if I was going to get out. Nobody 
could find an exit, nobody. 

I didn't know what would happen then. 
I kept hearing the sound of -- I guess it's the 
sounds of silence. But it wasn't silence; it was 
a cloud just coming down on us. 

We regrouped. People were trying to 
get out on cell phones or radios to no avail. 
There was a phone there. I'm not sure if anybody 
ever got out on the phone. I'm not sure if we 
knew where we were, except across the street from 
the Trade Center. That really doesn't narrow it 
down in New York City. 

Somebody found an exit. I'm not sure 



W. KOWALCZYK 11 

how long we were there for. We came out, I would 
probably say at the south side of Two World 
Financial Center. People said that it was near 
the area of the Winter Garden. It looked like a 
snowstorm, covered with white, and quiet, ever so 
quiet . 

The other scary thing -- to go back for 
a second -- I couldn't find my aide. My aide is 
a young man who happens to live in my 
neighborhood. I couldn't find him. For that 
moment, while I was trapped, I knew I was 
breathing and alive. I didn't know where he was. 

As we got out, we looked around, and 
people were devastated and just did not know 
where to go. What was weird is behind Two World 
Financial Center there's like a little cove. On 
the map it's indicated as the North Cove Yacht 
and Harbor. And I knew water was there because I 
had done planning in the past for the Statue of 
Liberty celebrations. You couldn't see the 
water . 

We regrouped, found Chief Goldfarb, 
Chief Villani and Chief Gombo. Probably the 
happiest moment of that day was when I saw my 



W. KOWALCZYK 12 

aide Michael. He said he came into the garage. 
I didn't see him. So I'm not sure if he even 
did. Once we were in the garage, there was a 
separation between the front and the back from 
debris . 

We went into another building, which I 
think was Three World Financial Center, or it 
might have been Four World Financial Center, one 
of the other buildings to the north, to try to 
strategize. We had discussions that we needed to 
reorganize and move north. We did not know what 
the issues were at that point in time. 

So people spoke about setting up 
staging areas on Chambers Street. I recommended 
that we go further north, just to stabilize. We 
later decided to move up to 23rd Street, to 
Chelsea Piers. I've commanded many operations. 
I'm a very aggressive, on-scene commander with 
the safety of the people that work with us first. 
But at that point in time I think I got selfish 
and I aggressively volunteered for the 23rd 
Street operation. 

I had fears I would never see my kids 
again. And I had an opportunity of life again. 



W. KOWALCZYK 13 

I found an ambulance crew. My aide and myself 
got into this ambulance, and it was like a slalom 
course, driving through debris. 

At that point the man-made snow of the 
World Trade Center was fairly deep. Somehow the 
operator of the vehicle -- to this day I don't 
know who it was -- got us up to 23rd Street. 

I met with representatives of Chelsea 
Piers. I asked for their assistance. They 
overwhelmingly welcomed us, whatever you need. 
That location would later be a very beneficial 
strategy point for days and weeks into the 
operation . 

As I was managing that, ambulances from 
all over were coming in. We tried to organize 
them, move them inside from West Street so they 
were safe. It was like I was at the gates of 
Shea Stadium at the end of a game. People were 
just running towards us. 

Ambulance crews were approaching me: 
Chief, I'm a haztac unit, let us go in there. I 
said let's get organized, they know we're here. 
About ten minutes later that same haztac crew 
came to me and got in my face. He wasn't 



W. KOWALCZYK 14 

insubordinate, but he was very aggressive. I 
pick him out as a sample of the work force there. 
Employees with an unknown danger but wanting to 
go and do their job and help people. I again, in 
a firmer tone, said you have to wait to get 
direction . 

Later that crew -- and one of the 
things that I clearly said to that paramedic or 
EMT, I'm not sure what his medical certification 
was, that it's my job to get you home at night to 
your family. Let me do that job. Some half hour 
later that same individual came over and thanked 
me and understood the reason why I stood my 
position . 

As time went by, many more resources 
started to arrive. We had Secret Service 
personnel at that location that helped us to 
develop a secure area separate from the public 
and to operate. 

Chief Pascale arrived. Several 
supervisors arrived. At that point it appeared 
that Chief Peruggia was the only person we were 
hearing on the radio. Chief Peruggia was trying 
to manage the operation. 



W. KOWALCZYK 15 

Sometime later -- and again, the clock 
stopped -- he requested my response up to the 
command post location. At that point you have to 
envision that the only thing we're able to see is 
large columns of smoke and hundreds and thousands 
of people running towards us. 

I remember going over to Chief Pascale 
and turning the Chelsea division over to her. I 
remember hugging her. I said Fran, they asked me 
to go to the command post. I'm not sure if I'll 
ever see you again, because of the unknowns of 
the situation. She said let me go, I'll go for 
you. It's okay. They asked me to go to the 
command post. I'll go down there. 

I took my aide, along with Lieutenant 
Byrnes in a command car, and we proceeded down 
West Street. I was scared. I was scared. 

We approached the command post. Chief 
Peruggia asked me to come down because he needed 
the help. I started to manage the operation, and 
I saw that command by committee was not going to 
work here. Everybody was putting ideas in. 

I said to Chief Peruggia: Don't take 
this the wrong way. But I'm going to take the 



W. KOWALCZYK 16 

job from you. At that point in time I assumed 
the responsibility for EMS operations, located 
next to the Fire Department command post and 
tried to put a strategy together. 

The hardest thing is that we didn't 
have contact with the outside world. We couldn't 
get through to headquarters . We were not sure 
what system policy decisions were made or 
implemented. We knew the people would come 
through and do the right thing, because that's 
what the Fire Department is made of, specifically 
the EMTs and paramedics, no different than the 
firefighters. When it comes down to it, they 
want to try to do the best job they can. 

We were setting up our operation and 
probably the most frustrating thing was that 
there were no patients . We had been trying to 
get a handle on the divisions and we put some 
structure to it. We set up a north and a south 
division; south being down by Battery Park, north 
being up by Chambers Street. Slowly an 
organizational structure started to be developed. 

It was sometime later that Chief 
McCracken made it up to the command post. We 



W. KOWALCZYK 17 

spoke about some policy issues and where I saw 
the organizational structure needing to go. I 
tried to provide my recommendations. One of the 
objectives was to get the EMS system back in 
operation . 

One of the hardest things to swallow 
was when I asked for a call status on the city. 
The dispatcher indicated that they were holding 
in excess of 400 assignments. I had to make a 
decision. I was looking at the enormity of this 
situation. I had to be concerned with Mrs. Jones 
having chest pains in the Bronx or in Brooklyn. 
We had a large number of resources up at Chelsea. 

Initially, I conferred with the fire 
incident commander, Chief Nigro, Chief Burns and 
Chief Carruthers and, I'm sorry, Chief Butler and 
Chief Carruthers. They asked me not to 
de-escalate any resources at this point in time. 

Losing the concept of time, I 
eventually -- or we eventually released 20 to 40 
ambulances back to 911, and the 911 system 
started to come back. 

In speaking with Chief McCracken, we 
had the concern of putting the 911 system back 



W. KOWALCZYK 18 

into operation. The way I recommended to do it 
initially was to utilize mutual aid resources for 
the scene operation and return the city units 
back to operation. 

That would do two things . A, we get 
the city people eventually back to their stations 
so we can regroup. It's difficult to take units 
from New Jersey and outside New York City and ask 
them to do 911 calls in the system when we didn't 
have the infrastructure for it. 

It was very hard to keep focused at 
establishing a strategy with the devastation in 
front of you. It was like building an EMS system 
from scratch. I remember through the night 
meeting with Coast Guard officials about hospital 
ships coming in, talking about DMAT, disaster 
medical assistance teams, coming in. It was like 
putting a system together from scratch. 

During this period the news started to 
filter into the command post about the passing of 
Chief Ganci, Father Judge, Commissioner Feehan, 
the reports of EMS, firefighters, police officers 
and civilians missing. This was not going to be 
an operation that we will secure in an hour. 



W. KOWALCZYK 19 

As I indicated, I started my day about 
5:30 in the morning. In between and amidst the 
chaos, I had to get phone calls to my kids and to 
my parents and to my in-laws to let them know I 
was okay and to make arrangements for my kids . I 
knew I wasn't going to be home that night. 

The day that started as any other day 
at 5:30 in the morning on September 11th ended 
when I went home about 9 to 10:00 the next 
morning. The days and weeks following it were 
scary. ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^| 

|, but things evolved, structures were 
put in place, things were modified. I probably 
did not talk to my staff from Division 3 for 
several days . 

It was an event that I will not forget. 
I think what's most troubling is in doing major 
assignments in the past, you go home and people 
watch them on the news and it's a forgotten 
memory in a day or two. In my local parish in 
Williston Park there were approximately 17 to 20 
people missing from our little neighborhood. 



W. KOWALCZYK 2 



So here as we sit on October 15th. 
Tomorrow I have to go to the funeral of her 
friend's father, along with many other funerals 
and memorial services. 

I think what's frustrating is usually I 
have to deal with this stuff inside myself. ^H 



Thank you for this opportunity. 

Q. Chief, if I might just ask you one 
other thing. When you were, just going back to 
running into the garage in the World Financial 
Center, that, I assume, was building one coming 
down, the first tower. 

A. That's correct. 

Q. After that do you remember where you 
were when the second one came down? 

A. There's two other collapses that I 



W. KOWALCZYK 21 

remember. I believe when the second one came 
down we were probably in that Winter Garden area. 
I remember again that same silence but yet roar 
and the vision. 

I remember when we had gone down to set 
up the command post. I was working with Chief 
Peruggia. It was another fear for our life when 
Seven World Trade Center wanted to come down. 

Sometimes you just don't know where to 
run . 

Q. Chief, unless there's anything else you 
can think of or you want to add, I thank you ever 
so much for the interview, your thoughts and all 
the rest. 



^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^| I cannot begin to fathom the 
feelings of the families of the police, fire, the 
EMS and all the civilians who are groping with 
this horrific disaster. We just don't know where 
it's going to go next. 



W. KOWALCZYK 



22 




Chief. 



Q. Once again, thank you ever so much, 

MR. TAMBASCO: This interview concludes 
at 1125 hours . 



File No. 9110097 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMT CHAD RITORTO 
Interview Date: October 16, 2001 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



C. RITORTO 2 

MR. RADENBERG: Today's date is October 
16th, 2001. The time is 1541 hours. I'm 
Paul Radenberg of the Fire Department, City 
of New York. I'm conducting an interview 
with -- 

EMT RITORTO: Chad Ritorto from 
Battalion 43, EMT 3015. 

MR. RADENBERG: The interview is being 
conducted at the Fire Department 
headquarters, fourth floor, in the BITS 
offices. This interview is regarding the 
events of September 11th, 2001. 
Q. Please start with when you went into 
Manhattan . 

A. Well, previously I called my battalion, 
told them that I was available. They stated that 
they didn't have anybody for me to work with at 
that time, to stand by. I then decided to 
proceed down to the World Trade on my own. I put 
on my Fire Department uniform, got all my gear. 
I went down in my personal car, down to the World 
Trade Center. 

I parked my car at approximately Albany 
and the West Side Highway. I then proceeded on 



C. RITORTO 3 

foot to where they were doing forward triage, 
which was at Liberty and the West Side Highway. 
I met up with an EMS chief; I'm not sure of his 
name. I met up with a chief, and he made me 
staging officer. 

We were in the process of collecting 
keys, and all of a sudden we heard somebody say 
run, the building was coming down. We looked up. 
Sure enough, the building came down. 

I then proceeded to attempt to evacuate 
the area by running west across West Side Highway 
from Liberty and managed to hide underneath the 
pedestrian foot bridge underneath the concrete 
staircase that leads from the street to the 
bridge . 

At that point I took cover. Building 
debris came down. I was struck on my head, my 
arm and my leg. I received a laceration over my 
right eye from it. With several other EMTs and 
paramedics from unknown destinations, we then 
went into the World Financial Center, and we 
managed to go through that building and come out 
on the gateway plaza walkway. From there we 
proceeded down towards Battery Park along the 



C. RITORTO 4 

esplanade when the second tower came down. 

After that I went back to where my car 
was and got in my car and proceeded north of 
Chambers. There were numerous patients that we 
were treating. There was debris falling from the 
windows of the buildings. There were bodies 
coming out of the windows. There were body parts 
all over the street. 

I don't know. That's pretty much the 
gist of what went down. It was scary. 

Q. So when the first tower collapsed, you 
were under here? 

A. Right. 

Q. In here? 

A. Right. I was actually on this corner, 
because they were -- 

Q. On this side? 

A. Right. They were pulling people out of 
this building. People were coming out of this 
building here, out of Two World Trade Center. 
There was an exit right here. This was forward 
triage. Initially they wanted us to go in there, 
but one of the captains didn't want EMS in there. 

Q. A fire captain or EMS captain? 



C. RITORTO 5 

A. An EMS captain. A fire chief told an 
EMS captain to bring about 30 EMTs into that 
tower, and the EMS captain didn't want to do 
that. So the fire chief got a little annoyed at 
him. All the EMTs stayed outside. But if the 
EMTs weren't outside, we would have had a lot 
more EMS fatalities when that other tower came 
down, because most of the EMS was outside and 
they were able to actually scatter down Liberty, 
down Washington, and down the West Side Highway. 

I was tripping over EMS guys underneath 
this bridge. They were like Hazollah guys and 
guys from Cornell and people from Metro Care. 

Q. This was forward triage over here? 

A. Right. 

Q. Liberty and Washington. 

A. Right. 

Q. Do you remember who the EMS captain 
was? 

A. I don't know. I don't really remember. 
Everything just happened like so fast. You were 
more worried about looking up. I had this 
feeling that we were too close because there was 
debris coming down. The aluminum siding, that 



C. RITORTO 6 

was just coming and it was just flopping down. 

It was in the air and looked like paper, but when 

it came down, it made such a crash. 

I told one of the chiefs we were way 
too close, we were way too close, we need to pull 
back. No, no, no, we're safe from here. I'm 
like, all right, whatever. 

Then somebody just said run, the 
building's coming down. We ran. I remember 
looking at the building. I was running for the 
building. There were guys in the doorway waving 
everybody in, trying to pull everybody in. I 
wasn't going to make it. 

I hid under that bridge. I tripped 
over somebody, and my helmet flew off. Then I 
got pelted. I managed to put my helmet back on 
and then just prayed. Then all of the debris 
came down. One minute there was light and air, 
and the next minute there's nothing. It was 
darkness and dust. 

You took one breath, and all the soot 
went in your mouth. It just dried your mouth 
instantly. You're taking it out of your mouth. 
It was like I didn't want to take a deep breath. 



C. RITORTO 7 

I'm taking small shallow breaths so I don't 
inhale all this stuff. 

I'm fumbling over debris, big bricks. 
I remember I saw the windows of the building, and 
I grabbed something. I burned my hands on it. 
You can see the scar here. I burned my hands on 
it. Then I went through the window. Then I 
remember seeing all the computers, and the lights 
were still on. The computers were all intact. 
There was really no debris on the ground. It was 
just really dusty in there. 

I managed to meet up with a bunch of 
other paramedics that were all in there. 

Q. That was — 

A. That was in that building right there. 

Q. This here? 

A. Yeah, the building that had the green 
dome on the roof. It's got to be the World 
Financial Center. 

Q. Yeah, one Financial. 

A. That's what I'm thinking, One World 
Financial Center. It's the only building that's 
right there. 

Q. When you initially got into the center, 



C. RITORTO 8 

you said you parked your car down here around 
Albany? 

A. Around Albany or Carlisle. 

Q. At what point in what was going on was 
that that you got there? Was the second tower 
already hit? 

A. The second tower was already struck. I 
got there probably a half hour after the second 
tower got hit. So we were there for about maybe 
20 minutes, 25 minutes, maybe. Time is like 
really sketchy. When we pulled up, it looked 
like a Sunday afternoon. There was nobody 
around, but there were cars everywhere and you 
can hear the sirens. You can actually hear the 
fires burning up in the buildings. 

There were like body parts all over the 
street. You couldn't even recognize anything. 
You just knew it was body parts because they were 
wrapped in clothing. It's like you're thinking, 
wow, that must have been some -- because there 
was debris everywhere. There were pieces of 
metal. There were people laying around. It was 
incredible . 

This was down over here. This wasn't 



C. RITORTO 9 

even anywhere near. There were body parts along 
the West Side Highway about as far as here, about 
two blocks south. It was incredible. 

We looked up, and it was just like a 
scene out of a movie. 

Q. When you got up to Liberty and 
Washington, that's where you met up with the EMS 
captain? 

A. Right. 

Q. So there was an EMS chief there too? 

A. Yeah, because he asked me, "Who are you 
with? What unit are you on?" I was like, "I'm 
extra personnel from Battalion 43." He said, 
"Good, you're staging officer until I can get 
somebody else down here. You're staging 
officer . " 

Q. You don't remember who that was, the 
EMS chief? 

A. No. An older guy with a mustache, 
grayish-black hair. There weren't too many EMS 
chiefs there. I don't know if it was Chief Grant 
or -- Chief somebody. I don't know. I couldn't 
even remember. 

Q. How about EMS units in that area? 



C. RITORTO 10 

A. There were two or three Fire Department 
ambulances there. When I was doing staging, I 
was collecting keys. Most of the ambulances that 
were there -- we had Hazollah there. There was 
Metro Care there. There were two ambulances from 
Broad Channel Fire Department there. There was a 
Cornell truck there. I remember seeing the Metro 
Care MERV. It was down closer to over here, to 
where Three World Trade was. They were closest. 
They were in front of that. 

That's pretty much as far as ambulances 
goes. Mostly Metro Care and voluntary hospitals 
and like three or four Fire Department 
ambulances . 

Q. Did you recognize anybody on the crews 
from those? 

A. From Metro Care. I used to work there. 
So everybody that was there I knew. I pretty 
much rendezvoused with them because I was doing 
staging and just sticking with people we knew. 
It was just easier for me to know whose bus is 
what . 

I don't recall if there was anybody -- 
I don't think there was anybody there from my 



C. RITORTO 11 

station. There was nobody there that I knew from 
the Fire Department. Nobody there that I knew 
from the Fire Department. Some from Metro Care 
and that ' s it . 

Q. You were down over here when the second 
tower came down? 

A. When the second tower came down, I was 
on the esplanade helping carry some injured 
firefighters to an ambulance. 

Q. Could you show it on the map? 

A. Yeah, right over here, because this is 
where -- we walked down from here, and we were 
carrying the injured firefighters to this point. 
There was an ambulance here. We took their stair 
chair because he couldn't stand anymore. 

So we took the stair chair, and we 
grabbed the stair chair and wheeled him just 
about as far as we could find an ambulance that 
was running. We tagged a Lutheran truck, and we 
put him in the Lutheran truck and they took off. 
Wherever they went, I have no idea. 

Q. Do you recall his name or company or 
anything like that? 

A. No. All of that stuff is just -- those 



C. RITORTO 12 

minor details, they're just gone with the wind. 
Q. Where did you pick him up? 
A. He was right outside -- he was in the 
gateway plaza. He was in the park area, where 
the park was. Because when we ran into this 
building, there were mostly EMTs . I think there 
was one ESU cop, and the ESU cop was leading us 
into the bowels of the building. I'm like, 
"Where are you going? You're bringing us further 
into the building. We don't know what kind of 
damage is up top. We need to get out of here." 

So we went back the way we came, and we 
found the door. It was a door like this, and it 
had sheetrock. The door was locked, so we kicked 
out the sheetrock. When we opened up the door, 
we happened to be like in the lobby. 

When we were in the lobby, that's where 
all the firefighters were in there, and they were 
waving us out. We saw the flashlights and stuff. 
They were waving us out, and we all ran out. 
That's when we hooked up with this injured 
firefighter, and we started carrying him down. 

We walked down just about as far as you 
can. It's like now that I think about it, what 



C. RITORTO 



13 



we should have done, we should have walked north, 
because as you're walking south, when the second 
tower came down, we were already down like by -- 
there's a pier down here or something. There's 
like a little pier or something. 
Q. Okay. 

A. And they were bringing up boats, power 
boats or regular boats . They were shoveling 
people off, and whenever they were bringing them, 
I don't know. It got so crazy. Then the second 
tower came down, and then an even darker cloud of 
dust started creeping over the park. 

People were just freaking out and 
trying to jump on the boats. It looked like a 
riot. Women and children first and everybody -- 
I'm like, look, the towers are down. That's it. 
The towers are down. Everyone needs to relax and 
keep walking, keep going, keep going. Everybody 
was just freaking out. The harbor boats were 
packed. They were starting to teeter-totter. 

I don't know. It was crazy. I was 
like, you know what -- then an EMS lieutenant, I 
met up with her, and she was like, "Oh, we have 
to go to Liberty Island." 



C. RITORTO 14 



Q. Do you know who that lieutenant was? 
A. No, it was just a female EMS lieutenant 
that was down there. 

Then I met up with one of the guys from 
Metro Care that I knew, and we just started 
walking. We walked back through the plaza, and I 
think we went down Rector Street. We came 
through here and walked back up West Side 
Highway. It was like, all right, you know what, 
we need to get out of here. We need to get out 
of this dust cloud. It's not doing anything for 
us . 

I was walking back to my car, and I 
expected to see an I beam through my car. I 
thought my car was going to be destroyed. But my 
car just had dust on it. We got in my car, and 
we just drove around the entire plaza like around 
1 PP. We went all the way around and came back 
up to over here. I just parked my car somewhere 
up here. 



C. RITORTO 15 

Then we just started walking around. 
Then we went into the Port Authority building 
that was over there. We got equipment, 
flashlights, helmets and stuff. They evacuated 
us out of there because they thought the building 
was going to explode or something. They said 
there was a gas leak. So we ran out of there. 

I met up with one of my good friends 
from Cornell somewhere on West Street. He saw 
the injury on my head. He said, "Where are you 
going?" I was like, "I don't know. I've got to 
go to a hospital. I'm going somewhere." He 
said, "Well, park your car somewhere." I jumped 
in my friend's car, and we jetted up to Cornell. 
I was like the first patient into Cornell. 

There was a Fire Department liaison 
there. He took my name, he took my shield 
number, he took everything. He had my equipment. 
He had everything. He took everything down. 
They did whatever they did. I got stitches and 
whatever. Then I met up with him. I never heard 
anything from him either. The Fire Department 
didn't know I was there. 

What did the Fire Department liaison 



C. RITORTO 16 

do? He had Fire Department ID on, and he was 
like, "I'm a liaison. Give me your name, give me 
your shield number." I specifically told him I'm 
from EMS, the Fire Department but I'm EMS. I'm 
not a firefighter; I'm EMS. Make sure you -- 
it's a big difference. 

Q. He was from the fire side? 

A. Yeah. He was a Fire Department 
liaison. I'm pretty sure it was the fire side. 
I don't think we have any. He took my name and 
stuff, and that was it. 

Q. Okay. Anything else you want to say, 
comments? 

A. No. Pretty close experience. Pretty 
scary. It might sound stupid, but I would do it 
again if I had to. I'd do it all over again. I 
don't care. 

Q. I thank you. 

A. Thank you. 

MR. RADENBERG: The time is now 1457. 

The interview is concluded. 



File No. 9110099 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

EMS LIEUTENANT AMY MONROE 

Interview Date: October 17, 2001 



Transcribed by Nancy Francis 



A. MONROE 

MR. FEILER: Today's date is October 17th, 
2001. The time now is 0934 hours and this is Monty 
Feiler of the Fire Department of the City of New York. 
I'm conducting an interview with the following 
individual: 

Q. Please state your name, rank and assigned 
area of command. 

A. Lieutenant Amy Monroe, EMS operations. 

Q. We're conducting the interview in Chief 
Mccracken's office, 7th floor, 9 MetroTech, Fire 
Department Headquarters, and the interview is regarding 
the events of September 11th, 2001. 

If you can, begin with the morning's 
activity, lieutenant. 

A. I responded to the triage, actually the 
staging center at Broadway between Fulton and Dey 
Street. Immediately after staging some of the 
vehicles, I immediately moved to the triage center, 
which was in front of the Millenium Hotel. That was at 
the intersection of Church and Fulton, directly in 
front of World Trade Center 1, which is the north 
tower, and I began to work there as the transport 
officer responsible for transporting patients and 
making sure patients were being transported to 



A. MONROE 

appropriate hospitals. 

Q. How did you become aware of the incident? 

A. I actually saw it on TV at home. I called my 
battalion and the officer there -- I was actually at 
that time working for Battalion 4 -- was screaming and 
saying get in here, just come in here. 

Q. How did you get down to the location? 

A. I drove my personal car to the station and I 
drove an ambulance to -- had somebody drive me in an 
ambulance to the location. 

Q. Were you given any specific direction on 
where to go, where to stage, anything like that? 

A. I can't recall how I knew, but I knew where 
the staging area was. I think maybe I just heard it 
over Citywide. But I did know where to go. 

Q. When you arrived, where did the ambulance 
leave you? 

A. We parked the ambulance on Broadway, Broadway 
maybe and Dey, maybe a little bit further down, further 
south . 

Q. Did you encounter any other officers? 

A. I did. Lieutenant Bill Melaragno, he was 
staging up on Broadway as well, and as I walked down to 
the triage site, Captain Janice Olszewski was in charge 



A. MONROE 

there and Lieutenant Bruce Medjuck was there. I don't 
think I recall any other officers being there. 

Q. As far as time reference, this was the first 
plane, second plane? 

A. This was after the second plane had hit. 

Q. Then what happened after that? 

A. We proceeded, like I said, to transport 
patients, and during the middle of transporting -- we 
had a lot of patients triaged which were sitting 
against the Millenium Hotel and which were walking 
wounded. Some of the burn patients we were 
transporting. We didn't have a lot of units down there 
at the time. They were trying to hold the units back 
onto Broadway. So we only brought the units down when 
it was absolute they were ready to pick up patients. 

Q. Right. 

A. Then World Trade Center 2 collapsed, and when 
2 collapsed, I actually ran east on Fulton. I was at 
the triage on Church. I ran east on Fulton, right near 
St. Paul's Chapel. 

Q. That's where you stayed? 

A. Yes. I ended up actually on Broadway and was 
caught in the collapse. 

Q. What happened after that? 



A. MONROE 

A. After I was caught in the collapse, I 
eventually -- there were three civilians. We were in a 
vehicle. Eventually we were able to drive out of the 
collapse. One of them was pretty serious. We all, of 
course, suffered from smoke inhalation. We drove as 
far as we could. The vehicle died because it had been 
exposed to, I guess, so much dust and everything. 

We drove to 14th Street and Broadway, and 
another lieutenant who had seen us who was not in the 
collapse was driving a command car, which was 
Lieutenant Adam Brynes. So when our vehicle died, he 
picked up all of us and the patients and we proceeded 
to Beth Israel Hospital. I ended up at Beth Israel 
Hospital for some time and the other patients, the 
three civilians, were treated there. 

Q. Anything else that you think is important, 
any other EMS people that you may have run into or 
spoken to that you recall? 

A. No, I did not really. I actually -- I'm 
trying to think. I did leave there. I was actually 
medicated, I had an IV, but I left there because I was 
actually on the FEMA team. So I left there and walked 
home and then went back down and redeployed right after 
that with the USAR team. 



A. MONROE 

But as far as the officers that I ran into, 
you know, after the collapse or during the collapse, 
no, it was just so quick, it was so sudden, and then 
really everybody was separated, totally separated. 

Q. Did you have a radio? 

A. I did have a radio, but there was really no 
radio transmission until just -- during the collapse it 
was so silent, and then after that I think the -- I 
believe I did hear over the radio, what I was hearing, 
what I thought I heard --it might be wrong, but this 
is what I thought I heard -- was deploy the weapons of 
mass destruction, the antidote kits, and that's the 
only thing I heard and that's the last thing I heard 
and I didn't hear anything over the air after that. I 
don't know if my radio went dead or whatever. My radio 
was covered, though, so it was broken. 

Q. The crew that drove you down there, do you 
remember who they were? 

A. The crew that drove me down there? EMT Peter 
(inaudible). He was actually on light duty. He drove 
me down there. 

Q. Anything else that you think is important? 

A. No. 

MR. FEILER: I want to thank you for spending 



A. MONROE 

the time with me for the interview. It's 0940 hours 
and this interview is concluded. 



File No. 9110100 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

CHIEF JERRY GOMBO 

Interview Date: October 17, 2001 



Transcribed by Nancy Francis 



J. GOMBO 

MR. FEILER: Today's date is October 17, 
2001. The time now is 0828 hours and this is Monty 
Feiler of the Fire Department of the City of New York. 
I'm conducting an interview with the following 
individual: 

Q. Please state your name, rank and assigned 
command . 

A. Assistant Chief Jerry Gombo from the EMS 
operations . 

Q. We're conducting this interview in Chief 
Gombo 's office on the 7th floor at EMS command. The 
interview is regarding the events of September 11, 
2001, and if you can just begin at the morning of 
September 11th. 

A. Sure. I logged on my usual early time, 
somewhere prior to 0530, on that Tuesday morning and 
arrived at my headquarters somewhere around 6:00 
o'clock. At that point I was just doing my usual 
morning activities, reviewing UORs, just checking the 
schedule, making sure that everything is in place as 
far as getting prepared for the day for the most part 
and reviewing the night activities. 

Then I recall somewhere prior to 9:00 o'clock 
Ross Terranova, Lieutenant Terranova, who at the time 



J. GOMBO 

was working down or situated down at 5 Operations, came 
running into my office informing me that a plane hit 
the World Trade Center and it was observed by Chief 
Ganci from his office. I ran down the hall just to see 
because you could see the towers from the other side of 
the building, which is just a few yards down, and I 
actually saw what appeared to be flames and smoke in 
one of the Trade Centers. 

I gave Ross the keys to my car and I came 
back here to secure my radio, which was charging, and 
we went down to the garage to start responding to the 
assignment. From looking at the job history for that 
day, I know that they assigned me to that job at about 
0855 hours. At the time three cars left from the 
garage heading in that direction. It was Chief Ganci, 
Chief Nigro, followed by myself. We went over the 
Brooklyn Bridge and headed towards the Twin Towers. 

Q. Were you with anybody? 

A. With Ross. Ross Terranova was driving the 
vehicle and it was just the two of us in the car. We 
were there quickly. As quickly as we left here, the 
entrance ramp to the Brooklyn Bridge was already shut 
down by PD, you know, accept for emergency vehicles. 
So on the approach to the World Trade Center listening 



J. GOMBO 

to the units getting assigned to the Center, we knew 
that -- well, obviously, we saw that there was a plane 
at that time, we didn't know the significance, whether 
it was a small plane, a large plane. The initial 
information was extremely sketchy at that point and I 
believe there was no Manhattan Chief on duty at the 
time. I believe Chief Hart was in refresher. So I 
knew that I was for the most part the first due Chief 
in coming from Fire headquarters. 

Anyway, as we made our way downtown, you 
know, traffic started getting a little congested 
already. As we approached the towers, we ended up 
leaving the car in close proximity of Trinity Church, 
you know, there's a cemetery there, downtown. 

Q. On the map, where would that be? What would 
be the cross streets? 

A. Okay. 

(Pause. ) 

A. I don't believe it's on your map. 

Q. Would that have been somewhere on Church 
Street? 

A. It's off of Church. Trinity Church. 
(Pause. ) 

Q. Actually, we can look for that later if you'd 



J. GOMBO 

like. 

A. Okay. Anyway I parked over -- well, actually 
Ross parked over in close proximity to the church and 
then we walked on foot towards the World Trade Center, 
which was down the block. It was in close proximity, 
but not so close as to interfere with any type of 
responding vehicles or anything like that. 

As we approached the towers, this would be 
from the east side heading west, we saw people it 
appeared, lots of people, you know, possibly hundreds, 
evacuated, which was a good thing. It seemed to be 
fairly quickly but in an orderly fashion as well. We 
saw several EMS units and I believe they were Fire 
Department units at the time. I know I did converse 
with a few of them because they were treating patients 
laying on the floor and this was on Church. Everybody 
was wearing their helmet, which was good because there 
was debris, like just different types of parts. It 
might have been like plane parts, in fact, they did 
look like it, on the floor with stuff coming down as 
well. 

So I told the crews to cross back up to the 
further side of Church and that's where they should set 
up their treatment and triage area at that point. I 



J. GOMBO 

don't believe there were any officers there, but there 
were like two or three units operating and they were 
setting up triage. I don't recall any of the 
employees ' names . 

At that point I wanted to head to the other 
side of the tower where our planned staging is 
located. I walked around on foot, of course, the other 
side of the tower. Now I'm on the south side of the 
tower, which was West Street, and there I encountered 
several other EMS units that were coming into the 
area. People were exiting the building, the Trade 
Center. Lots of people, it appeared, in orderly 
fashion, but there didn't seem to be any patients, if 
you will. Everybody was like walking and no one was 
complaining of any types of injuries or ailments or 
anything like that. So we set up a staging area on 
West and Vesey and I think that was communicated to 
citywide that that's where the units should come in 
to. 

At that point I did come across several EMS 
officers. Captain Olszewski from this office as well 
as Bruce Medjuck, who I sent around to where I 
initially came, because when I arrived there, there 
were no supervisors operating on the east side of the 



J. GOMBO 

building . 

Q. Church Street? 

A. Right. So there were no supervisors there. 
Although I knew more bosses were responding in, I felt 
it important to get at least a captain and a lieutenant 
there. So they were both directed to go over there and 
to set up a staging and treatment sector there. 

On my side now, I ran into several people, 
Captain Stone, Captain Pinkus, and Ross, who was with 
me the whole time. He had the radio and stuff like 
that. Those two captains, I believe Chief Basile and 
maybe Captain Sickles as well. I did a similar type of 
setup on that side as well. Because there were no 
patients at all, we communicated that staging should be 
set up there. I believe I left Captain Pinkus over 
there to coordinate staging, which at that point was 
going to be our primary staging location. 

I inquired as to where the Fire command post 
was set up at that point and I was told that it was in 
the lobby of the tower. 

Q. The north tower? 

A. Tower No. 2. 

Q. Which I believe is the south tower? 

A. Let me just look at your map. This is the 



J. GOMBO 

north tower. Where is the south tower on your map? 
Q. Right here. 
A. I believe it was the north tower, correct. 

So I made my way over to the command post 
with I believe Captain Stone, and we took a crew with 
us on foot, you know, the ambulances were staging 
there, and we headed towards the lobby of the command 
post . 

As we were approaching the lobby of the 
command post, at that point we saw there were a 
significant amount of body parts, torsos, half torsos, 
arms, the whole gamut, as far as what one might expect 
from this type of disaster. I made my way into the 
command post. I informed Chief Hayden, who was at the 
time the incident commander, that we're here and that 
we're going to be setting up EMS operations staging 
outside. Obviously, he was involved with coordinating 
a significant amount of Fire resources. And I said, if 
you need anything, I'll remain in eyeshot. 

Once again, although there were a significant 
number of body parts exterior, there were really no 
viable patients to contend with. There were not many 
civilians in the lobby where the command post was being 
set up. It was I believe the security desk. You know 



J. GOMBO 

where when you come in into the center you check in. 
Q. Right. 

A. So there were like security personnel by the 
command post, building security that is, you know, and 
a significant number of Fire personnel as well as PD, 
but beyond that, few if any civilians that I noticed. 

I did run across Chief Gabriel, who was 
assigned to OEM. We conversed a little as to what the 
game plan was going to be as far as EMS, once again, 
keeping in mind that people were exiting and we weren't 
being overwhelmed with patients. 

I believe at that point we couldn't transmit 
over the radio from in there, the citywide frequency, 
you know, it was just too much interference. Even 
though we were in the lobby and the majority of the 
windows were blown out, we weren't able to transmit. I 
don't know whether it was because it was just 
interference or whether there were too many units on 
the frequency. 

So we were there for a few minutes and Chief 
Callan from the Fire Department, one of the tour 
commanders, I believe it was him that initially told 
me, but it could have been Chief Hayden, I don't recall 
which Chief told us that they were going to secure the 



10 

J. GOMBO 



command post from the tower lobby and move it directly 
across West Street. Also, that I should pull the EMS 
resources out of the tower, it was deemed not safe, you 
know, and that they would be pulling out the Fire 
resources as well and set up across the street. 

I believe I left Chief Basile and Captain 
Stone there to make sure that all the EMS resources 
were pulled out. There was a lot of emergency 
personnel coming in and out and given the fact that we 
don't have protective clothing, the decision was made 
for EMS to evacuate. I left them there to make sure 
that EMS personnel were evacuated from that area and 
returned to the staging location. Then once again on 
foot with Ross I started to make my way out of the 
tower lobby and go to the command post, which was going 
to be on the other side of West Street. 

So I arrived at the command post there and at 
that point they had the Fire command post set up there 
and Chief Kowalczyk was on the scene. He was the major 
that day, so he functioned as the operations officer, 
and I was there. I recall being with Chief Ganci and 
Commissioner Feehan and several other Chief officers 
from Fire and, once again, Fire set up their post, 
their command post, and we set up a few feet away in 



11 

J. GOMBO 



eyeshot. I asked Chief Kowalczyk to continue 
functioning as the operations officer. Apparently, he 
was able to communicate with the radio at that point. 
I believe that the initial staging that was 
set up on both sides of the building were functioning 
and active. However, once again, there weren't a 
significant number of patients to deal with. 

No sooner than, I don't know, it seemed like 
a few minutes -- and I have to just share with you at 
this point, my times might be off. At the corner of my 
eye, the second plane now comes into the building. I 
know that there was a time line that you shared and... 

Q. 9:06. 

A. 9:06 was the second plane? 

Q. Right. 

A. Okay. At that point I would say that we knew 
it wasn't an accident. I mean, two planes on a clear, 
sunny, warm day, into the Trade Center, we knew that 
there was something very unusual going on. At the time 
of the impact, we were able to feel heat that was 
generated from the explosion at the command post, which 
was across West Street, and West is a fairly large 
street with that island in there, and debris was 
showering all over West Street. And I can only tell 



12 
J. GOMBO 



you from what was within my eyesight. 

It appeared after that the pace of the 
civilians exiting the building increased, but 
throughout, for the most part, there was an orderly 
evacuation of personnel. I guess the sense was 
disbelief, you know, because here you're dealing with 
one major operation and before you know it, it's like a 
mirror image, if you will, but this one, when you were 
there and you heard it and you felt it, it had more of 
an impact. 

So at that point I believe I was conversing 
with Chief Kowalczyk about the operation and the 
deployment of some resources, both ambulance and Chief 
officers, further down West Street to deal now with 
this other plane into the tower that we were going to 
have to contend with. 

No sooner than that, I guess the best words 
that I could describe this, it felt sort of like an 
earthquake. The sky darkened and you heard this 
thunderous roar. It was like a volcano, if you will, 
not that I ever experienced a volcano, but I guess 
that's the way I could describe it, and this cloud just 
coming down. The ground was shaking and this roar and 
at that point everybody from the command post -- I 



13 
J. GOMBO 



forgot to tell you where. 

The command post was in the driveway of 2 
World Financial Center. It was a fairly large-sized 
driveway. So we were on the incline, we meaning the 
Fire and EMS command post. 

Q. Where would that be on the map? 

A. Right here. 

Q. Okay. 

A. 2 World Financial Center, there's a driveway 
leading to West Street, similar to the driveway when 
you come into Fire headquarters, but whereas this you 
drive into the building and it's covered as soon as you 
enter, there the driveway was open; there was no roof 
on top of it. So you had the incline and we were set 
up right at the base where the street met the driveway 
and, like I said, Fire and us, and then this thing came 
down on us, which obviously was the first tower that 
collapsed, and everybody took cover or ran. 

I'm not sure whether I was pulled or it was 
instant, but based on the incline, we went into the 
garage of 2 World Financial Center. I know Ross was 
with me. I believe there were maybe up to 20 other 
emergency service personnel there. However, it was 
difficult to tell because what happened was we ran in, 



14 
J. GOMBO 



we dove behind this white van that was parked like at 
the base of the driveway. We ducked behind that and 
then the whole place became dark as a result of debris 
just filling the whole driveway. And mind you, this 
was a significant-sized driveway. We knew there was a 
lot of debris out there and, like I said, it appeared 
that some of the people ran in the opposite direction 
from the garage and quite a few people did retreat to 
the garage. 

There were no lights. It was dark. As much 
as you wanted to breathe, it was extremely painful. 
I'm sure I'm going to reiterate what other people 
experienced. Every time you took a breath, your mouth 
filled up with this soot, powder, cement, whatever it 
was, and although you didn't want to breathe, you 
didn't have a choice; you had to breathe. 

I carry a flashlight on me always and I know 
that people always are like why do you need a 
flashlight? So I took out the flashlight and I turned 
it on and you still couldn't see in front of you; there 
was that much debris and stuff. So what I attempted to 
do to the best of my ability without having good vision 

-- and there were a few of us. We were talking. We 
were able to communicate with each other. I think what 



15 
J. GOMBO 



we wanted to make sure was, before we advanced to the 
back of the garage, because we were not going to be 
able to exit the way we came down because the whole 
exit or entrance to the garage was covered with debris, 
we just wanted to make sure that we weren't leaving 
anybody that was like partially trapped, if you will, 
behind us. To the best of our ability we made sure 
that we moved forward not leaving anybody behind. 
However, you know, we didn't know what was going on at 
the other side of the rubble. 

We made our way up a small staircase that 
looked like maybe the attendant or security office of 
the garage, and I recall seeing this water cooler, you 
know, the five-gallon jugs of water. There were a 
significant number of people down there at the time and 
we were all rinsing our mouths just trying to get some 
of the soot out of our mouths so that we could 
breathe. There were a few Fire personnel. I remember 
an OEM, Harry Winters, was down there with us. Who 
else? Several firefighters. 

We asked them, because they had their Scott 
packs and stuff, to find us an exit because clearly we 
weren't getting out the way we came in and we couldn't 
see any doors right in the back. There was a phone on 



16 
J. GOMBO 



the desk where this water cooler was, but it was dead. 
I mean, there were no phone calls. So at this point we 
didn't have any type of radio communication, the cell 
phones didn't work, the hard line phone didn't work, 
there were no lights, and once everybody got into the 
office area we closed the door behind us and put 
something by the door to try to keep the area as clean 
as possible without all this soot. I mean, it was 
beyond belief the amount of soot that was in the 
garage. 

We must have been there, although it seemed 
like an eternity, a few minutes when they informed us 
that there was an exit onto the marina side. If you 
look over here on the map, it would be the North Cove 
Yacht Harbor. So we exited from the back through a 
staircase. We had to go up because we were in the 
basement and we came down on this side and it was 
amazing. When you exited on this side, it was a sunny, 
beautiful day. There was no debris, no anything over 
here. 

So at that point we decided we were going to, 
once again, return to the command post. The way we 
were going to go about doing that is there was a 
walkway or a driveway that led you onto North End. We 



17 
J. GOMBO 



were going to go back down Vesey to West and be at the 
command post, you know, to continue coordinating the 
operation. When we got to Vesey and North End, right 
over here, there were a significant number of EMS 
resources staging there. 

Now, it was like wild because when we were in 
the harbor here, it was like nothing happened, and as 
soon as we were able to make that turn and visualize 
what was going on, it was like going from one extreme 
to the other. There was still soot coming down, and 
one of the amazing things, that paper, I mean, as much 
as that doesn't seem significant, mounds and mounds of 
paper just scattered all over the place. So, as you 
were walking, if you could imagine walking in a 
snowstorm? 

Q. Right. 

A. That's what it actually was. You had this 
soot coming down on you and then in lieu of snow on the 
ground you had mounds and mounds of paper, I mean, an 
unbelievable amount of paper. I'm not talking about 
one. Just every time you took a step there were mounds 
of it, it was inches high, plus all of the soot and 
debris and stuff like that. 

So there were quite a few ambulance resources 



18 
J. GOMBO 



not limited to Fire, you know, and the MERV ended up 
here. At that point we were informed that the initial 
triage that was set up on West and Vesey retreated one 
block at the time of the collapse. 

Now, when we ran into the basement, we lost 
contact with the world. We really didn't know what was 
going on on the outside, and our initial objective was 
to make it back to the command post. 

Anyway, we did bump into a whole bunch of EMS 
personnel here and they had a treatment sector going on 
in the lobby of the building here. I don't recall the 
name of the building. But, once again, it was a fairly 
large lobby and seemed to be a safe environment because 
you didn't have all that soot or garbage coming down, 
and there were patients and treatment going down there. 
Q. Civilian patients or a combination? 
A. I believe primarily civilian patients. 

So I recall at that point seeing Chief 
Carrasquillo, I believe it was, and it seemed to me 
that they were able to deal with the patient load that 
they had there. So I was going to attempt once again 
to make my way up Vesey back to the command post. 

No sooner did we get, I would say, several 
yards down Vesey Street heading east to west when the 



19 
J. GOMBO 



second tower came down, and once again this huge 
mushroom cloud, not going up but coming towards us. So 
there was a rush of primarily uniformed personnel. 
Now, according to this, the north tower, that was at 
10:29. 

Q. Right. 

A. So I take it that that's an approximate time 
that we started making our way there. So once again we 
retreated back to this lobby area. 

Now, at that point there were several EMS 
chiefs that were there. I remember Chief Goldfarb, 
Chief Villani, Chief Pascale, Chief Carrasquillo and 
Chief Kowalczyk, besides myself. We went into the 
stairwell of the building here just to converse for a 
little while and to put together some type of 
strategy. 

Once again, mind you, we have no 
communications with the outside world and, in essence, 
what we were able to see is just what we were able to 
see on this block. So there are no phones, no radio 
communications . 

We spoke, and after assessing the situation, 
the decision was made that it was not safe for us to 
try to make our way back up Vesey to West. We did not 



20 
J. GOMBO 



know whether there were other buildings in danger of 
collapsing, and at that point the decision was made for 
the EMS resources to go to two different staging areas 
on the outskirts of this incident. The decision was 
made, on the north, Chelsea Piers because there was a 
large parking area. We really wanted to move back out 
of this area until it was deemed safe for EMS personnel 
to operate. On the south, we decided that we would use 
the ferry terminal, Staten Island ferry terminal. So 
those were the two staging areas that we were going to 
send the EMS resources that were there after they 
finished treating the patients. 

I divvied up the chiefs that were with me. I 
believe I sent Chief Pascale and maybe Chief Villani to 
the ferry terminal and Chief Basile I sent, I believe 
it was Chief Basile, up to Chelsea. Mind you, all of 
this had to be on foot because the cars were elsewhere 
and we didn't know their condition, and because there 
was no communication with anybody. I told them, I told 
these chiefs, we're going to go there. We're going to 
secure this area with patients. I left Chief 
Carrasquillo behind until we were able to evacuate that 
location and go to those two locations. 

I decided that I was going to make it to One 



21 
J. GOMBO 



Police Plaza. Knowing that we weren't going to have 
access to 7 World Trade Center where the OEM office is, 
the most logical thing that came to mind within walking 
distance would be One Police Plaza. So I figured I 
would go there. I took Chief Goldfarb, Ross Terranova 
and Chief Goldfarb 's aide with me. 

That was the plan. The resources would go to 
those two staging areas and I would go to Police Plaza 
and try to coordinate activities there. 

Q. At this time I'm just going to change the 
tape to side B. 

A. Sure. 

(Pause. ) 

Q. Continuing the interview with Chief Jerry 
Gombo, go ahead, sir. 

A. Okay. So we started on foot heading towards 
One Police Plaza, the four of us, and as a result of 
what was going on and what we were able to determine, 
we decided that we would need to take the scenic route, 
if you will, around to One Police Plaza. We were going 
to walk north and up around City Hall and then come 
around to One Police Plaza as opposed to trying to make 
our way across Vesey. Although that would have been 
quicker, at that point I deemed it to be too 



22 
J. GOMBO 



dangerous . 

We walked a few blocks. I remember a few 
things that come to mind that I most probably will 
never forget. The silence. It was just dead silent, 
like it was like the middle of the night, but yet it 
was sort of day with this haze. You saw this smoke, 
the soot was still coming down, papers all over the 
place, and that was pretty much the way it was 
throughout our journey. 

I came across Chief Callan, who prior to 
that, the last time I saw him was in the lobby of the 
Trade Center where they set up the command post. He 
appeared not to be injured but to be in a daze. I 
informed him at this point I was going to make it on 
foot to One Police Plaza. I invited him to come with 
us so that we could set up some type of operation there 
and coordinate it with the other agencies, and he opted 
not to take me up on that offer but to attempt to make 
it back to the command post. 

I asked him that, if he was able to do that 
and if he saw Chief McCracken or any of the other EMS 
chiefs operating on the scene, to let them know what we 
did as far as the two staging areas where we retreated 
to and let them know that I was making my way to One 



23 
J. GOMBO 



Police Plaza. Just like I didn't know who else was 
operating on the scene as a result of not having 
communication, I knew that people were going to be 
inquiring as to individuals' whereabouts and things 
like that. I knew it was going to take us some time to 
make it to where we needed to go. 

Q. Where did you meet Chief Callan? 

A. It had to be several blocks from Vesey and 
North End. I believe we were walking up North End and 
I believe that actually changes into some other 
street. But that was the direction which we were 
heading in. We were heading north on North End, once 
again, in an attempt to come around City Hall, which is 
not on the map here, I don't believe. 

Q. This is City Hall park here. 

A. Oh, City Hall park. Okay. So our plan was 
we were going to make our way up North End, City Hall 
Park, I think to -- well, it had to be somewhere I 
would say around maybe Murray or Park. The reason why 
I say that, after we passed Chief Callan, after another 
few minutes on foot, a police officer from the Chief of 
Department's office came by in a golf cart and he 
noticed us. We were wearing our uniforms and helmets 
and he saw the stars. We flagged him down and asked if 



24 
J. GOMBO 



he would be kind enough to take us over to One Police 
Plaza. We were trying to get to command and control. 
He was gracious enough to do that. So the four of us 
got onto this golf cart and this officer took us over 
to One Police Plaza, which saved us a significant 
amount of travel time because we were going to do this 
on foot and he was able to take us practically to the 
door, which was great. 

We got to One Police Plaza and we went up to 
command and control, which was on the 8th floor. I 
went over to the desk and inquired whether there were 
any other Fire Department personnel here, which at the 
time I was informed that there were not. I told them 
that we're from the Fire Department, EMS, and the room 
was jammed with all different types of representation 
from agencies. However, we were the first Fire 
Department reps to get there. 

Within a few minutes they were able to give 
us some table space and some phones. I made contact 
with several locations at that time. I called FOP, 
fire operations. I introduced myself to them and gave 
them the phone number and I told them that I was at 
command and control. I made similar notifications to 
EMD, our office here in operations, and we just tried 



25 
J. GOMBO 



to coordinate whatever information we were able to get 
from EMD or FOP at the time. 

We were there actually for quite a few 
hours. We finally left that location at I would say 
roughly 10:00 o'clock or so in the evening. I called 
and had Captain Connelly, who was on duty, come down to 
man command and control. There were other Fire 
personnel. I don't recall the officer's name, but 
there were a few other Fire personnel that prior to 
that, like several hours after we arrived there, also 
arrived to represent the Fire Department. 

When I left in the evening at 10:00 o'clock, 
we made our way, once again, on foot, back towards the 
EMS command post at that time. We went past Trinity 
Church to see if I had a car and if it was there. To 
my surprise it was. It had a significant number of 
scratches needless to say. The driver's window was 
smashed. But the car was there. There was Fire 
apparatus around it functioning with Fire personnel. 
There were charged hoses all around the car. 

So I figured it was safe. At that point we 
made it down to the command post where it was good to 
see some of the EMS personnel that either I didn't see 
beforehand or I did and we got lost in the sauce, if 



26 
J. GOMBO 



you will. I stood there for a little while and then 
made it to my car and I was able to get it out, and 
that's the story for 9/11. 

Q. I just want to ask, after the first building 
collapsed, you said that the Fire command post had 
relocated to World Financial Center? 

A. No, no. From the lobby. That was prior to 
the second plane hitting. 

Q. Did you ever re-establish contact with them 
or you never made it back to them? 

A. No. We weren't able to do that. We came out 
on the marina side, because the whole garage, we were 
buried. We were buried in the garage. So I made it 
out the marina side up North on Vesey and attempted to 
go back, but when we made this turn and went up Vesey, 
that's when the second building came down, and at that 
point the decision was made that there was no sense in 
jeopardizing our safety in making it to that location. 
If we couldn't even make it up this block, we said 
there would be no way that the command post would be 
able to be functioning at that location, and that's 
when we made the decision for the two staging areas in 
a safe proximity away. Because we had no phones or 
radio communications, that's when I decided I would 



27 
J. GOMBO 



hope that One Police Plaza would be the most logical 
thing. I found out after we were there for several 
hours that an interagency command post was set up at 
the Police Academy up on 23rd Street. As to why that 
decision was made, that was beyond me. 

Q. Was there any other EMS personnel or Fire 
Department personnel that you remember seeing that we 
didn't talk about? 

A. There were so many names and faces. I tried 
to mention the ones that I had the most interaction 
with. I'm sure that I left out some specific names and 
locations. Most probably, somewhere as I was crossing 
over from the tower to the secondary Fire command post 
on the other side of West Street, I saw a lot of EMS 
personnel, but at this point the names escape me. So I 
was only able to recall the ones that I interacted with 
or had conversation or gave direction to or things like 
that. But that's my plight and I'm glad I'm here to 
share it with you. 

Q. I agree. 

A. Hopefully I was able to give you some insight 
as to some of my actions during the course of the day. 
Unfortunately, afterwards we found out that the people 
we were with at the command post didn't make it. You 



28 
J. GOMBO 



know, Chief Ganci and Commissioner Feehan and Father 
Judge, just a tremendous loss, a tremendous loss. 

Q. Is there anything else that you'd like to 
add? 

A. You know what? I think I gave you everything 
that comes to mind, leaving out some of the gory 
details, which I'm sure other people have talked 
about. But as far as an operations perspective, I 
think I shared with you the most significant things 
that I'd been involved with. 

It was just a very difficult situation. I've 
responded to my share of MCIs during my career and this 
was a very complex situation as a result of the ongoing 
collapses. From a patient perspective, it wasn't that 
complex, but there was absolutely no communication 
other than face to face. No cells, no radios. The 
only thing I could say, in retrospect, I believe that 
we made the best decisions as to how to proceed 
operationally given our assessment of the situation and 
the resources and the scenario that we were presented 
with . 

MR. FEILER: Okay. I want to thank you very 
much for participating. The time now is 0923 and this 
concludes the interview. 



File No. 9110101 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

PARAMEDIC NEIL SWEETING 

Interview Date: October 17, 2001 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



N. SWEETING 2 

MS. BASTEDENBECK: Today is October 
17th. The time is 11:31 a.m. My name is 
Christine Bastedenbeck . I work for the New 
York City Fire Department. I'm conducting 
an interview this morning at Battalion 20 
with the following individual. 
PARAMEDIC SWEETING: Neil 
Sweeting-5274 , assigned as the paramedic 
coordinator for Division 6. 

Q. Neil, I'm just going to ask you if you 
can recount the events of the morning of 
September 11th, 2001. 

A. I was in the division office, which is 
located up in the north Bronx on the grounds of 
Jacobi Hospital, when we started hearing reports 
of a plane crash into one of the towers at the 
Trade Center. 

Chief Pascale from the division got 
paged, and she came out and told us about this. 
We started hearing reports of it over the 
citywide radio frequency. We turned the 
television on in the office, and pretty shocked, 
just as anybody was. 

My first thoughts were oh, my God, some 



N. SWEETING 3 

plane was drastically off course and crashed into 
the building. I didn't realize it was a large 
airliner. I thought it was a small plane, just 
seeing these awful photos of terrible fires and 
smoke billowing out. 

We hung out at the division. I was 
chomping at the bit with everybody else wanting 
to get down there, but the chief was holding us 
back until she was assigned. 

While we were watching, we were hearing 
the radio on the citywide frequency, and all 
these units being assigned and supervisors 
calling for more help and trying to set up 
different treatment areas, when we saw the second 
plane hit. 

I remember saying to the other 
coordinator, Steven Pilla, that we saw the plane 
go by, and my first thought again was oh, my God, 
this pilot must have been blinded by the smoke or 
distracted and then he crashed right into the 
building. At that point we realized something 
was seriously wrong. 

At this point Chief Pascale said, 
"Let's go," and we all ran out of the office and 



N. SWEETING 4 

jumped in the car and started heading downtown. 
There were five of us in the chief's car. I was 
driving Chief Pascale, Lieutenant Mike Cahill, 
Steve Pilla and EMT Amedegnato. 

We started heading down, cut across the 
Bronx, got to the West Side Highway, and 
proceeded down and actually got caught in traffic 
around 125th Street — 158th Street. The Police 
Department was turning all vehicles off the 
highway, but they were ushering emergency 
vehicles through. But we got tied up in the 
traffic up until that point, which was annoying 
but at this point, as the story went, it may have 
had a tremendous outcome on the five of us in 
that car. 

I remember driving down the highway, 
and when we got down, oh, into like the eighties 
and nineties on the highway, we started to get a 
really good view of lower Manhattan and you could 
see the two towers burning. It was just surreal. 

We started hearing terrible screams on 
the radio of people yelling, "Oh, my God, there 
are people jumping! There are people jumping!" 
I was at the first Trade Center disaster in '93, 



N. SWEETING J 

and I thought that was going to be the biggest 
thing I would ever experience in my career. I 
had a feeling this was going to be even worse, 
not knowing they were going to fall down. 

As we got closer, I remember saying to 
the other people, I said, "This is the kind of 
fire, there are going to be a lot of people dead 
in this. This is also a fire that you're going 
to lose firemen in. This is where people are 
going to die, unfortunately." 

We proceeded down. We got stuck in a 
little more traffic down below 57th Street when 
we hit like 12th Avenue, the West Side Highway 
there. We made it down, and we got I believe it 
was around West Street and Barclay, which is 
probably about two blocks, a block and a half 
away, when Steve actually said, "Oh, my God." I 
looked up, and the tower's falling. 

We didn't hear it, which was really 
weird, because we had the radios going and the 
sirens going. So I didn't hear the sound of it 
initially. Once I looked up, I started hearing 
it. 

At this point hundreds of people are 



N. SWEETING 6 

running at us . We pulled over -- we looked for a 
spot to park initially, but then there were so 
many people coming at us that I was going to run 
somebody over. We just abandoned the car on the 
corner of West Street and Barclay. 

Q. Where you indicated the number 1 on the 
map? 

A. Yes. 

I remember all four doors opened up 
before we even stopped moving. We pulled over, 
we jumped out and popped the trunk quickly and 
grabbed our helmets and just started running and 
got enveloped by this cloud of dust that's so 
vivid to everybody now. 

We didn't really understood the 
magnitude as to what had happened at this point. 
There was just so many people running towards us. 
We kind of went west towards the Hudson River. 
We were just totally enveloped in this cloud. 
You couldn't see. It was choking. It was in 
your eyes. I felt like somebody had poured a cup 
of sand down my throat. It was horrible. 

After about ten minutes of this, it 
kind of calmed down a little bit. People stopped 



N. SWEETING 7 

running. We actually headed back down closer in 
to see what we could do and got down to Vesey 
Street . 

Q. At that time were all of you still 
together? 

A. No, we weren't. No, I'm sorry, we were 
together. We all ended up back on Vesey. We 
didn't walk down as a group, but we all kind of 
migrated, because people were kind of turning 
back and going down to see what they could do. 

We got to Vesey, and we were -- at 
Vesey and West there's I believe it was part of 
the Financial Center. We started helping some 
people that were coming out and looking for a 
triage area. People came out, and Chief Villani, 
a chief from the Fire Department from EMS, said, 
"Let's start setting up a triage area here in the 
lobby of this building." 

We started actually seeing a lot of 
patients. They were bringing a lot of people in. 
We didn't have a lot of equipment. We didn't 
have anything with us . But even the units that 
were there, people had run and abandoned their 
equipment during the initial stages. But people 



N. SWEETING 8 

started getting stuff, and we brought a lot of 
oxygen in. It was basically just a quick triage, 
and we were trying to move some people out. 

I remember a battalion chief coming in. 
There were two chiefs. There was one chief that 
we were treating who was badly injured. His head 
was split and he was bleeding bad, and he was 
just in a daze and just staring straight ahead 
like he had no idea what had happened. None of 
us . 

Another chief came in -- and he was 
telling us first, the first chief, "We shouldn't 
be here. We should get out of here." A second 
chief came in and said, "Listen, we need to move. 
This is a terrorist act." That's the first time 
I thought that way. He said, "We've got to get 
away from this place." 

Q. They were both fire suppression chiefs? 

A. Fire suppression chiefs. 

Q. Do you know their names? 

A. No, I don't. 

We started moving out, loading people 
up. We brought a bunch of stretchers at this 
point, and we were just loading patients, just 



N. SWEETING 9 

putting them on the stretchers. We had some 
people that were pretty seriously hurt, some head 
injuries, a couple people -- there was one 
gentleman that was unconscious, a lot of people 
with respiratory problems from all the dust, eye 
injuries from the dust. We started throwing them 
on stretchers and running and getting out. 

I remember the maintenance guys or 
engineers from this building, this big office 
building, brought big jugs of water that we were 
using, and we were wiping people down and 
flushing eyes. They had a cart full, like a 
linen cart, full of towels, which was great, 
because we were wiping people down. It was 
really very helpful. 

I remember when we heard abandon the 
site, I said, wow, this would be really good to 
keep with us. So I started pushing this cart, 
and I got stuck in the doorway with it, when we 
started hearing this rumble. I can remember -- I 
specifically remember this like twisting sound of 
metal. We were probably about half a block away 
from the complex at this point. 

You heard a big boom, it was quiet for 



N. SWEETING 10 

about ten seconds. Then you could hear another 
one. Now I realize it was the floors starting to 
stack on top of each other as they were falling. 
It was spaced apart in the beginning, but then it 
got to just a tremendous roar and a rumble that I 
will never forget. 

We started running. People were diving 
into the back of ambulances that were open and on 
the hoods of ambulances, cars. Anything that was 
moving, they were trying to get into. There was 
one ambulance, there must have been 25 people 
piled into the back of it: firemen, policemen, 
civilians, EMS. It was just incredible. 

I remember the MERV bus with the ramp 
that it had going up the street. The guy didn't 
even stop to unhook the stairs of the ramp, and 
everything was dragging down the street. I 
thought it ironic, watch somebody live through 
this and get run over by the MERV or wiped out by 
this ramp that was dragging behind the bus. 

We started running, but there was a 
woman on Vesey Street between the Financial 
Center and the complex, like the plaza, and she 
got hit with something. She just went down like 



N. SWEETING 11 

a shot. She got up and tried to run and just 
collapsed again. You could see that she had 
snapped her leg, her ankle, like right at the 
TIB-FIB and her ankle. It looked like when 
horses snap their hoof. Her foot was just 
flopping. The poor woman was trying to run. 

I saw her, and a paramedic from Cabrini 
Hospital -- I don't even know his name -- he must 
have seen her at the same time because he ran 
down and we picked her up, the two of us, and 
started running west on Vesey Street towards 
Battery Park and the promenade and towards the 
Hudson River, when the wave, the first 
concussion, came down the street. 

When you were that close, there was 
like a wind to it. I'm 6-4 and 240 pounds, and 
it knocked me down like a rag doll, ten feet 
away, down the street. I landed on top of this 
poor woman. She was having a bad enough day. 

We picked her up, and I ran to the 
corner of the Financial Center building and I 
guess that's part of the promenade there for 
Battery Park, the walkway there. 

Q. Right over here, World Financial. 



N. SWEETING 12 

A. No. Right. Okay. I picked her up 
like right in here. We ran down here. Actually 
on this building here, we dove down the side of 
that building to use it as a -- 

Q. You're indicating you dove around the 
corner of Three World Financial Center? 

A. Of Three World Financial Center. 

Q. The American Express building? 

A. Right, into this like courtyard here. 

Q. Okay. 

A. And used that as a shield to cover us. 
I think that I had my helmet. Actually since I 
was -- actually the assignment I'm in right now 
is a very last-minute, temporary assignment. I 
didn't have my helmet or coat or anything with 
me. It was all back in my station in Harlem. So 
I grabbed somebody's helmet from here. 
Thankfully when I ran out the door I grabbed 
somebody's helmet. 

When I dove around the corner, I just 
curled up into a fetal position and covered my 
head and just tried to ride it out. There was 
just this roar. It was pitch-black. I could 
feel stuff hitting me but not like big debris but 



N. SWEETING 13 

smaller stuff that was mixed in with this cloud. 
It was choking. It was hard to breathe. You 
couldn't see. 

Then the concussion and the wave 
stopped, and you were still encompassed in this, 
but the pressure wasn't to it that was initially 
there. We were stuck in this cloud probably for 
20, 30 minutes afterwards. The cloud eventually 
went blocks and blocks up the street. 

I grabbed an ambulance. I flagged an 
ambulance coming down, and I had the guy quickly 
toss some stuff into my eyes, water, because I 
couldn't see. I remember reaching in and 
grabbing one of his masks that he had. I just 
threw that on. 

We picked the woman up, and we just put 
her on the bench. He had some people in there, 
so we just laid this lady out on the bench. That 
was the last I saw of her. It was an ambulance 
unit from St. Vincent's Hospital, and they just 
started heading north up out of the area. 

I stayed and was walking in a daze. I 
remember there was so much stuff hitting my eyes 
I had to put my sunglasses on, which was really 



N. SWEETING 14 

kind of funny. Here it was dark. It was almost 
pitch-black, and I'm walking around with 
sunglasses, just because I needed something to 
block my eyes . 

Then it was just eerily quiet. It was 
just so quiet. I don't know if it was from the 
dust that was just suffocating the air. But for 
the next 10 minutes, 15 minutes, nobody knew 
where to go, what to do and where to start. 

There were a lot of people walking 
around, but there weren't a lot of -- now that I 
think back, there weren't a lot of walking 
wounded. There really were more just people 
stunned that were walking around. 

I'll never forget how quiet it was. I 
said it to people that day, but it's actually an 
analogy that seems to be being used a lot, like 
after it snows when it's very quiet. You could 
hear people calling out. You could hear a lot of 
firemen, their alarms going off on their air 
packs . 

I had a radio with me which I lost when 
I got tumbled, thrown. It came out of the 
holster. So I couldn't talk to anybody. I 



N. SWEETING 15 

didn't know where anybody was. The four other 
people I was with, I had no idea where they were. 
I knew they were with me when we were in the 
Financial Center and then started running out. I 
found two of them in about 45 minutes. Another 
one was about an hour after that as we started 
heading north out of there. 

But Chief Pascale we didn't find for 
about five hours, and I was like, oh, my God. We 
had no idea where she went. One of the guys said 
they saw her running -- when the second one came, 
they saw her running north. I'm figuring that 
she wasn't buried, because we weren't right 
underneath it. We were knocked down by the 
concussion, but we weren't -- so I didn't think 
she was buried or anything, but I didn't know 
where she had gone at this point. 

So we tried to see what we could do 
down there. Some people were coming up to me 
asking for help. My first 45 minutes of triage 
just involved telling people "Go north. Get out 
of here. You don't want to be here." They would 
ask me, "Where do I go?" I said, "I don't know. 
But you don't want to be here, go north. They'll 



N. SWEETING 16 

be setting stuff up." Just get people out of 
there . 

I don't know who it was that told me, 
but we finally started moving. When I started 
running into some of the other people, they had 
some radios. They were advising people to go up 
to Stuyvesant High School, which is on the corner 
of Chambers Street and West. 

We got in there, and we were in the 
building like a minute when people just started 
screaming, "Run, run, run, run." I'm like, oh, 
my God, now what? It was one of those things, 
you just run when everybody's running. People 
are just storming out the back doors and just 
running up the highway, West Side Highway there. 

I find out that it was -- one, somebody 
said there was a bomb, but it turned out it was 
Con Edison was screaming that there was a gas 
leak and they were afraid something was going to 
happen, it was going to blow up. Everybody was 
just so jumpy at the time that just the slightest 
thing would set them off. People were just 
running . 

So we ran out of there. We were then 



N. SWEETING 17 

again milling around, not knowing where to go. 
We were originally trying to get a triage area 
set up in Stuyvesant High School. Everybody 
bailed out on that. Then there were people 
saying to go to Chelsea Piers, which was a good 
hike. That's a good 20 blocks away. 

We started walking, and I got up to 
north Moore Street and the West Side Highway. 
It's part of the Borough of Manhattan Community 
College. The Port Authority had kind of taken 
over this building, the police. They were using 
the gymnasium as their meeting point and 
treatment area there for their employees. 

They started calling, "EMS, EMS, EMS. 
We have some guys hurt." So we went in there. 
Again, I didn't have a radio. I couldn't talk to 
anybody. I didn't have any equipment. There 
were a few people; mostly walking wounded, but 
there were a few people that were pretty banged 
up, a lot of respiratory problems. I didn't even 
have an oxygen tank. 

I guess a few more units or some people 
must have gotten flagged because some equipment 
started coming in there. I don't know where Port 



N. SWEETING 18 

Authority -- they must have had some type of 
contingency for their equipment from their other 
facilities at the airports or bridges and 
tunnels, because they started bringing truckloads 
of their equipment in. 

So we stayed there, the three of us. 
We stayed there pretty much for a good four or 
five hours. I'll never forget, they brought a 
truck, and it looks like they must have gone to a 
Duane Reade store because they must have just 
held the bags up and people cleared the shelves, 
because there were like hundreds of bottles of 
Tylenol and bandages and tape and gauze. I could 
just see they probably cleared out a Duane Reade 
store . 

So we tried to do whatever help we 
could. Some hospital doctors were showing up, 
and they started bringing some of their own 
equipment in. So we started having some stuff. 
That wasn't one of the actual EMS or Fire 
Department established triage areas; this was 
pretty much one of the hospitals started doing it 
at that point. But we hung out there for a good 
part of the day helping out, seeing what we could 



N. SWEETING 19 

do . 

I remember I figured I need to call my 
wife. I know she's going to be freaking out. 
She's a schoolteacher over in Queens. I called 
her school, and I couldn't get through. It was 
busy, busy, busy. At first I couldn't get her 
cell phone. I finally -- I guess this whole 
thing happened before 11:00. I finally was able 
to get through to her at about 4:00 that 
afternoon . 

I went and started walking around 
Manhattan College, Borough of Manhattan College, 
and I left the gymnasium and was walking through 
the hallways, just trying to find any office that 
was open that I could use the telephone. I was 
sitting at some guy's -- I don't even know who it 
was, somebody's desk, and using his phone. 

I called my house. She wasn't home. 
Something made me just call her family in Queens. 
It turns out that's where she went, because they 
had closed a lot of bridges down in the city. 
She couldn't back over the Whitestone Bridge. I 
finally got a hold of her; it was probably a 
little before 4: 00. 



N. SWEETING 20 

She had heard the reports of possibly 
hundreds of Fire Department rescue workers 
possibly killed or missing and the whole scenario 
of the towers falling. I cried. I was crying. 
I left two messages on my machine in case she had 
gotten home. She said, "You sounded terrible. 
You sounded like a wreck. Your voice was 
shaking." I was. I was visibly shaking. 

I remember asking one of the Port 
Authority cops what exactly happened, because I 
didn't know the whole magnitude. I didn't know 
anything at this point. It was several hours 
before I heard about the Pentagon and the plane 
that went down in Pennsylvania. 

I didn't realize the towers had come 
down completely. I thought it was just the area 
above where the planes had crashed. I didn't 
realize they had come all the way down. I 
thought the tops had fallen off. They were like 
no, they're down completely. I said, "No, no, 
just above where --" He's like, "No, I'm telling 
you, they fell completely." 

I didn't hear about the whole other 
episodes out of town for several hours. Then I 



N. SWEETING 21 

started hearing people telling me. I heard 
rumors that the military shot down planes, they 
had attacked the Pentagon and there were other 
sites. I didn't really grasp the magnitude of it 
at that point. 

I didn't get out of there until -- I 
don't know, it was probably close to -- I don't 
know -- 10, 11:00 that night we kind of got 
relieved. Then we were back at 4 a.m. I went 
down there for another 2 hours. I remember 
being down there again that day. I was 
exhausted. I spent time in the morgue, which was 
just a grim, grim detail the first day or two. 
Very few intact. 

I remember while we were there another 
building fell, like a half a building that had 
been damaged. I remember everybody running 
again, just taking off and running. I just said, 
I'm tired of these buildings falling down on me. 
I can't run from these things anymore. 

Q. Was that still on the first day? 

A. That was the second day. 

Q. Seven came? 

A. Well, seven fell about 5 or 6:00. I 



N. SWEETING 22 

was there. I was several blocks away, but I saw 
the whole thing go down. Again you could see 
everybody running. But I didn't run because I 
knew I was far enough away. 

But this other building that fell, it 
was one of the ones damages that was like a fire 
damaged building that part of it fell the next 
day. 

It was something I'll never forget. 
The scariest time of my life. I remember after I 
got up after diving behind that building, I was 
counting body parts to make sure everything was 
still with me. 

Last night actually -- this is, what, a 
month, five weeks later -- I go to graduate 
school in Manhattan. School had been canceled 
because of this, and last night, October 16th, 
was our first night back. It was the first time 
that I had driven down the West Side Highway 
since that day. I've been to the site numerous, 
numerous times, but I always came in from the 
east side of Manhattan. This was the first time 
I went down. 

It really shook me up because I 



N. SWEETING 23 

remember -- I started getting these flashes of I 
remember the towers burning and watching them and 
saying oh, my God, this is where we were when we 
were saying things like people are going to die, 
this is going to be terrible. 

I can still see these pictures in my 
mind of them burning. It really shook me up when 
I went to class. Then they're not there anymore. 
It's just like this major hole in New York City 
down there. It was terrible. 

So that's pretty much my story. I 
consider myself very lucky since I was close. I 
wasn't right underneath it, but I was close 
enough to actually be knocked down. At this time 
I'm thankful I was stuck in traffic, because I 
was driving a chief and we would have been going 
to the command post. There are numerous chiefs 
in the Fire Department that are no longer here. 

I've heard stories from chiefs and 
fellow chiefs aides who were right there that 
really had very close calls. I wonder where we 
would have been if I hadn't lost five minutes in 
traffic on the highway. 

It was tough. Since I've been in this 



N. SWEETING 24 

position, I haven't been on an ambulance since 
I've been working in the coordinator position, 
and I'll be in this position for like another 



So that's about it. I'm thankful we're 
here . 

Q. Any final thoughts you want to add? 
A. I think it was -- even in the total 
terror and chaos of the first 45 minutes to an 
hour, even, prior to the buildings falling, there 
were just some incredible acts performed by 
people, not only from EMS, the firefighters, the 
police officers. 

But when the towers came down, the way 



N. SWEETING 25 

people came together and just started doing 
whatever had to be done -- there were people that 
weren't officers, EMTs and medics, that were 
stepping up and saying this is what needs to be 
done. We need to set up something here. Let's 
just do it. People just talking the initiative 
on their own. I think it was amazing how it ran. 

Unfortunately there weren't a whole lot 
of people to help, unfortunately. At the first 
Trade Center in '93, there were a thousand people 
and we were very stretched. But this time we 
weren't -- unfortunately there weren't people to 
help . 

But people stepped up. We were just 
seeing people going above and beyond and people 
walking around in a dazed look but still doing 
what had to be done. It was amazing. 

In a way I feel fortunate in a way that 
I was there because I got to see people at their 
best and do what they're trained to do and do 
what they're not trained to do and pull it 
together. That's an experience I'll never 
forget . 

On the other sense, sometimes you hope 



N. SWEETING 26 

you weren't there because the horrors that were 
experienced will never be forgotten. I had a lot 
of trouble sleeping for the first couple of days, 
because I was working an incredible number of 
hours. I really had trouble sleeping. It was 
rough, but we're going on. 

This has to be rough on you over and 
over . 

Q. Yeah, it gets a little rough, a little 
rough . 

A. It was close. I had a doubt at one 
point when the second tower came down and when we 
picked this woman up, especially when we were 
knocked down on the street. I really had some 
doubts for a few seconds there. It was scary, 
but we got through it. 

It's changed me. I'm in graduate 
school. I have a little ways to go. I was kind 
of thinking that I may explore other options, 
career options. Even just prior to this I was 
getting a little tired of the EMS field and the 
job. I've been in this for 15 years with the 
city now. I was looking, kind of exploring 
things out there. If the right opportunity 



N. SWEETING 27 

presented itself, I probably would have stepped 
up and taken it. 

But right now, even after all this, I 
feel right now I can't leave right now. There's 
something that's holding me here. I haven't 
looked at anything since, but it's just I don't 
feel like I can leave right now. There's 
something that has to be -- until that pile's 
cleaned up and these people are found, I don't 
think it would be right for me to leave. It may 
not be the best thing for me to stay, but it 
wouldn't be right for me to leave. So we're 
going to hang in and stick it out for a while and 
take it day by day, see where we're going. 
I think that's enough. 
MS. BASTEDENBECK: The time is now 
12:06. 

Neil, I thank you very much for your 
time. This interview is now concluded. 



File No. 9110102 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMS CHIEF FRAN PASCALE 
Interview Date: October 17, 2001 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



F. PASCALE 2 

MS. BASTEDENBECK: It's October 17th, 
2 001. The time is 9:45 a.m. My name is 
Christine Bastedenbeck with the New York 
City Fire Department. Today we are 
conducting an interview with the following 
individual . 

CHIEF PASCALE: FRAN PASCALE, division 
commander of Division 6, EMS operations. 

MS. BASTEDENBECK: Also present for the 
interview -- 

MR. ECCLESTON: Christopher Eccleston 
of the New York City Fire Department, World 
Trade Center disaster task force. 
Q. Chief, we would just like you to relate 
to us the events of the morning of September 
11th, 2001. 

A. Okay. I was in my office, and I was on 
the telephone. My staff yelled to me from inside 
of the outer office, indicating that a plane had 
gone and hit the World Trade Center. They 
happened to be watching this. 

I got up, and I went over to the 
television. I came back into my office, and I'm 
not sure if I actually called up citywide or RCC 



F. PASCALE 3 

to see if they had any additional information. 
From there we turned on the radio, and I knew 
there was quite a few chiefs starting to head 
down that way. 

Right after that we were told another 
plane hit the World Trade Center. From there I 
called up citywide, and they had indicated that 
maybe I'd better go. They hadn't heard from 
anybody. 

What was actually on my mind is one of 
the things that chief McCracken always stresses, 
that he didn't want all of the chiefs to respond 
at one particular incident. Wait to see if 
somebody calls you, because otherwise all the 
resources are tied up in one location. So that 
kind of stuck in my head. 

With that I told my staff, "Let's go 
down into the World Trade Center, " especially 
since citywide hadn't heard from anybody. So I 
took my staff, and in my head I was already 
planning that if I go to another sector or part 
of the division, depending on how they divide up 
the World Trade Center, I would have a sufficient 
amount of staff that we wouldn't have to pull 



F. PASCALE 4 

from anybody else. 

I also told the paramedics to bring 
their ALS equipment in case we would need them 
for triage. Most likely we stocked up the car 
with not only equipment, I had a lieutenant, I 
had a light duty person. I figured she could do 
at least recording or tracking, whatever the need 
would be. The lieutenant certainly could handle 
a sector, and I had the ALS coordinator, which he 
could certainly be used as a paramedic. So that 
was my plan as I was going down there as 
additional resources. 

Ironically we wound up having a lot of 
traffic, and we were finding it a hard way 
getting down into the World Trade Center. 
Anyway, we finally managed to get onto West 
Street and it started to move, the traffic. 

As we got into the area -- and I guess 
it was somewhere on West Street, 30th or 
something like that, you could really see the 
type of disaster that was going on. My initial 
thought was I wonder what really was happening 
down there. 

As we hit, it was West and Vesey, there 



F. PASCALE 5 

was a police officer -- we hadn't even parked the 
car -- who starts yelling at us, telling us to 
get out of the way, pull the car and run, the 
building was coming down. Either he heard a 
rumbling, whatever. At that moment you could see 
this big cloud. 

We pulled over. It was as we're on 
Vesey Street we pulled the car to the side. We 
started to see the debris starting to come down. 
We really didn't grab any type of equipment. We 
just figured, well, they know more than we do. 
We better star running. 

At that point -- 

Q. Would you just indicate on the map 
where you are with a number 1, where you left the 
vehicle . 

A. It was between -- I think it's called 
West End and West. So it's on Vesey between West 
and West End. So it's right in between that 
block and -- where is it? It's on -- 

Q. North End? 

A. It's probably, yeah, only a few car 
lengths, figure halfway into Vesey. So maybe 
midpoint . 



F. PASCALE 6 

Q. Just indicate it with the number 1. 

A. I would think that's -- 

Q. Just an approximation. 

A. -- pretty close to it. 

We basically got out of the car. We 
didn't really take anything because by then there 
was a tremendous amount of debris, and it became 
engulfed with a black cloud. I did not see where 
my personnel had ran for cover. It just got very 
black, very dark. I think probably at that 
particular moment I was more concerned, thinking 
of where did they go, because I could not see 
anything in front of me. 

I continued to run up, and I think 
that's where I ended on West End Street. It was 
quite a while before I saw anybody. Then all of 
a sudden as the cloud kind of lightened up a 
little bit -- I was pretty much covered with the 
soot and the debris -- I started to see a 
tremendous amount of ambulances coming my way. 
That would be actually on West End. 

From there what I did is I notified 
citywide that I had numerous vehicles coming in 
my direction. At that point I think I was the 



F. PASCALE 7 

only voice there because I was standing right on 
the corner. 

What I did is I stopped the vehicles, 
and by then I saw I think it was Lieutenant 
Cahill and a few other people that I knew. Some 
of the ambulances I knew. 

So what we decided to do at that moment 
was to set up a secondary staging. I didn't even 
know where the original staging was. So we 
separated the ALS units from the BLS units and 
make it very easy to identify should they start 
calling in the units . 

I remember seeing Hazollah. I remember 
seeing some voluntary units. Definitely there 
were Fire Department units . I did not see any of 
my peers at that time. I saw a few other 
lieutenants. I know there was Lieutenant Cahill. 
I think I may have seen Captain Stone. I'm not 
sure. Everybody was pretty much running around a 
little bit. 

We were able to set them or at least 
guide them on both sides, and what we had 
automatically did with them is make sure that all 
of their -- they put some type of face mask on 



F. PASCALE 8 

because there was really very heavy -- it was 
dark, but it was clearly up a little bit. 

So we got everybody to put face masks 
on. There were a few patients around. A few 
people had some minor injuries. We had whatever 
units were there on site -- whether they were ALS 
or BLS . We separated them. They were continuing 
to give some treatment. They actually 
transported a couple of people from that 
location . 

Q. Where was that staging area? 

A. This was all along West End Avenue. 
Let me just see where -- this is North End. 
Where they actually came from -- they had to come 
from the north side behind the Merrill Lynch 
building. I believe that was the one. That's 
where I saw all the units coming from. We had a 
couple stragglers coming up from Vesey, but most 
of them were coming from that location. 

We were doing fine. I hadn't seen 
still nobody there. All of a sudden we heard I 
guess a rumbling of some sort. ESU had showed up 
with their vehicle and stuff and said we have to 
go before they collapse, get everybody out of the 



F. PASCALE 9 

area . 

I wasn't sure which way the building 
was going to fall, so what I did is -- and with 
some of the EMTs and paramedics that were 
standing outside with their vehicles, we just 
told them to get in the vehicles and start 
moving, just get out of the area. 

I ran. I didn't think of taking a 
vehicle or jumping inside a vehicle. I stood 
there watching everybody leaving the area. The 
cloud was worse than actually the first one, I 
thought. Total darkness, completely darkness, a 
lot of debris. 

I wasn't able to see, and I don't know 
if it was just the fact that my glasses were so 
full of soot and everything as well as getting 
some soot in my eyes. I certainly didn't need 
anything more. Seeing was difficult enough. 

With that, I remember running, and only 
later on did I realize I was somewhere around the 
school. Most of the units left. I did not know, 
actually, at that point where to take cover. 
There was nobody else with me. I didn't even 
realize I was in the street until I heard 



F. PASCALE 10 

something behind me. 

When I looked, turned around, I 
remember it was one of our vehicles. They were 
kind of lost. They didn't know where they were 
traveling, and I just told them keep straight and 
go very slow, only because we couldn't see 
anything in front of us. I just reminded this 
unit -- I think it was the medic unit from Coney 
Island, and if I saw the fellow, I would know who 
it was . 

So we spoke a couple minutes . I told 
him to watch whatever 's in front of him, because 
I had no idea if the vehicles had stopped, if 
there were people just abandoning them, or people 
were walking in the roadway, like I was walking 
in the roadway. 

If I didn't turn around, he probably 
could have ran over me. He never saw me, and I 
never saw him, except he had the lights on and I 
saw the flashing. 

From there I remember a woman coming 
out of the cloud, and that's the best way of 
saying. She was coming, up it would have been 
off Vesey Street. Actually my first initial 



F. PASCALE 11 

response was I told her, "What are you doing 
here? You have to get out of here." I remember 
her reply, and only then did I realize she had a 
camera. She turned around and she said, "You 
don't understand," and she disappeared, just 
disappeared. 

I would not even be able to find out 
who she was, what she looked like. I know it was 
a woman. My reaction to her comment was that she 
must have been media and she wanted to take as 
much film as she could, because it was a 
large-size camera, movie camera, that she had. 
So it wasn't just somebody just walking around 
with this. She just disappeared. 

Then as the cloud cleared up, I was 
like in a round circle, and I think that is where 
the school is . 

Q. Stuyvesant High School or the college? 
A. I think it was Stuyvesant. It goes 
around. I wasn't too far from there, and that's 
where I ended up. 

I made my way back, and then I started 
to see other units kind of coming back. I 
remember speaking to somebody and asking them if 



F. PASCALE 12 

they saw any chiefs, anybody around. I think it 
was CHIEF GOMBO on the air. Somebody had 
directed me toward the building where there was 
going to be a triage area. 

When I walked in the building, I 
remember seeing Carrasquillo . There was Gombo 
there. Who else was there? Lieutenant Cahill 
was there. I remember seeing Steve Pilla, who is 
my ALS coordinator, and I couldn't believe that 
that's where they were, so close but so far away. 
That was my reaction to them, where were you? I 
thought something terrible had happened. We 
didn't know. They didn't have any radios on 
them. 

From what I was told, one group ran in 
the building and then a couple of my other 
employees ran into I guess it was a trailer. 
They all piled up in this trailer. I couldn't 
even tell you where the trailer was. They said 
it was close to where I was. I couldn't see a 
thing . 

So I went into the area, and I saw 
Chief Kowalczyk, I saw CHIEF GOMBO. I asked 
about Chief McCracken. Nobody had an answer. 



F. PASCALE 13 

They had said they saw Chief Basile around. I 
wasn't sure who else was down there. I know 
Chief Goldfarb was down there. I didn't even 
know that Chief Villani was down there. A lot of 
people had responded down there. Until much 
later on I had no idea actually who went down 
there . 

From there CHIEF GOMBO had requested 
that the chiefs all gather outside of the 
building, which I'm not sure the street. It was 
on the corner of that building -- 

Q. Stuyvesant is up over here somewhere. 

A. No, Stuyvesant is where I landed up 
after trying to beat the cloud, which obviously I 
didn't. It was on the other side. 

Q. The hotel, is that where you came out? 

A. No, I don't think it was the hotel. It 
had a beautiful -- it could have been part of the 
hotel, come to think of it. 

Q. Was it on the water or by the water? 

A. Maybe it was Four World Trade Center. 
It may have been Four World Trade Center. I 
think they have a large -- I remember taking a 
look when I got into the building. What do they 



F. PASCALE 14 

call it? They had a garden in a dome. 
Q. An atrium? 

A. The atrium and everything. Then I 
remember somebody gave me some towels so I could 
wipe my glasses. Just little things I remember. 

I went outside, and then CHIEF GOMBO 
wanted to basically try to get the sectors and 
whatever else needed to be done, start some kind 
of a plan. 

I remember Chief Carrasquillo and I -- 
at first he had indicated that I was going to 
stay down there, but then he had wanted me to go 
up to Chelsea Street. He had asked me where my 
car was, and I told him -- I said, "It's parked, 
but I couldn't tell you the condition of the car 
right now. " 

He had asked me to take somebody with 
me, preferably a supervisor. I remember asking 
for Captain Pinkus . He was there, so the first 
person I saw. He had asked me if there was a way 
if he could possibly grab some type of vehicle or 
whatever and get up to Chelsea. 

Believe it or not, I guess at that 
point I had no idea where Chelsea was. I 



F. PASCALE 15 

couldn't even think of how far are we from 
Chelsea. I'm thinking of everything was in such 
a small area. I would have never thought Chelsea 
being considerably different, you know, pretty 
far away. That was off on 17th. 

So we looked at each other. We asked 
where this pier was, and Captain Pinkus and I -- 
and I couldn't tell you where we grabbed this 
unit, who this unit was. It was volunteers. We 
just told them, "We need your vehicle. Take us 
to Chelsea location." 

I don't even know how far you want me 
to go into this. 

Q. Just go a couple hours past. 
A. Okay. This particular crew was ironic. 
They looked at me; I looked at them. They said, 
"No, we can't take you." I said, "There's not 
going to be any questions. You're going to take 
me, and that's the bottom line." 

Between the two of us, the way we 
looked and the captain turned around and said, 
"You don't realize, this is a chief. Just listen 
to what she says. Otherwise she's going to take 
the whole entire vehicle." This poor crew, I 



F. PASCALE 16 

couldn't begin to tell you who they were, but I 
remember they had no stretcher. It was a 
half-equipped vehicle. 

It was so funny, we finally managed to 
get into West Street again, trying to go up to 
the West Side Highway. As we were traveling -- 
it wasn't even West Side Highway. I don't even 
remember what street we were traveling on. We 
couldn't get down to the west side. We had to 
take a detour. 

As we were traveling, there was a group 
of people who actually flagged us down. They 
said that we had a pedestrian struck. We're 
looking at each other. We're saying, well, this 
is good, there's no equipment, no stretcher, no 
long board, nothing in the vehicle. We better 
think quickly how we're going to lift up this 
patient . 

Pinkus and I jumped out of the vehicle. 
The male was actually laying on his stomach. I 
rolled him over. We opened up his airway. We 
were able to get a pulse. It turned out that he 
wasn't actually a pedestrian struck. It was 
medical-related. Later on I understand that it 



F. PASCALE 17 

was cardiac-related. 

So we rolled him over. I told the 
crew -- we did have oxygen. The crew brought 
oxygen. I attempted to put an OPA in him. He 
gagged, so that was a good sign for me. There 
was a couple of us who were able to lift him up, 
and we were able to put the man on a stretcher. 
We told the crew take him to the hospital. This 
was a situation we certainly didn't expect. 

From there we jumped out of the 
vehicle. I'm not sure how far we were. It 
seemed like we were miles away, because I 
couldn't even tell you where we were flagged on 
this. Maybe it was even Broadway. It was a 
major roadway. 

With that we were trying to stop other 
vehicles, because we had no vehicles. I mean, it 
was the craziest situation. Any other time you 
would say, well, I'll grab another command. 
There was no such thing of grabbing anything. 
You had to use your common sense. 

So with that we went over to -- there 
was a group of construction workers, and I asked 
them if we could have a lift from the 



F. PASCALE 18 

construction offices. At that point there was no 
supervisor, and their truck -- we were going to 
hop in the construction truck. It doesn't make a 
difference at that point. Their truck was kind 
of jammed up with all sorts of material. They 
were actually constructing at a site there. 

We ran in the street, and we tried to 
stop a vehicle. I remember getting very angry at 
this particular vehicle because it happened to 
be -- and I'm not sure, but it was definitely 
either a private contractor or one of their 
non-911 transport unit. 

I remember looking at their name, and I 
said if I could catch their number, I better not 
see them again, because they just blew the light. 
They just kept on going. That really ticked me 
off, in plain English. 

Some of the construction workers came 
over, and they said, "What could we do?" I said, 
"Whatever vehicle it looks like you could put two 
more people on for one stop, and they're going to 
take us to where we need to go." 

Ironically we stopped a vehicle, and I 
don't even remember the type of vehicle we hopped 



F. PASCALE 19 

in, but we got our lift up to Chelsea Street. By 
then Kowalczyk was already up there. Truthfully 
just thinking about it, I may not even have seen 
Chief Kowalczyk at that initial briefing, because 
he was already up there. He was actually in 
charge of the Chelsea location. Actually Chief 
Gombo wanted me to assist Chief Kowalczyk with 
the staging up there. 

I remember us jumping out of the 
vehicle and we walked over there. We then got 
word that they wanted Chief Kowalczyk back down 
to the site. I remember talking to Chief 

lot of people reacted differently during 
different times. 

had offered to go back down there at that point. 
It really didn't make a difference where I was 
going to be. I stayed in the Chelsea area, and I 
basically tried to continue what he started. I 
remember there must have been about 75 vehicles 
lined up on the West Side Highway. So we were 
trying to organize that. 



F. PASCALE 2 

With that, I remember two bus loads of 
doctors jumping out of the vehicles and saying, 
"We're here to help. We want to go downtown." 
Basically I didn't want them to go down there. 
It was dangerous enough to start off with, but I 
think we needed to -- if we were going to use 
these medical personnel, we needed to use them 
the way they should have been, call them in, set 
them up . 

When I saw all these bus loads of 
doctors, they had just finished a convention. I 
remember that very clearly. They were at a 
convention, so the whole entire convention closed 
down. These were surgical doctors, medical 
doctors and everything. They had asked, "What 
can we do in the interim?" 

With that I remember Dr. Asada showing 
up and Dr. Neal Richmond. I had to let them know 
we had a lot of doctors; what could we do. Also, 
I wouldn't say this, but to keep them occupied. 
I just didn't think it was good to get too many 
people in an area that was really dangerous . 

If I would have sent them down there 
and anything would have happened, I think that 



F. PASCALE 21 

would have bothered me. It was bad enough to 
control your own people that were down there. So 
we decided that the best thing to do -- and 
really it was a very good idea, although it 
wasn't used. 

We went into the pier, and I spoke to 
basically the director of the pier, Pier 36. I 
could be wrong on the pier number, but I think it 
was Pier 36. 

We got permission to utilize the whole 
entire pier, and we had a lot of resources which 
we really would have been very beneficial should 
the situation turn out other than having so many 
fatalities as opposed to the wounded. 

I remember ' 93 because I was down at 
the World Trade Center in '93. We had more 
injuries as opposed to fatalities. So it was a 
bit different. We didn't know what was going on 
as far as fatalities down there. 

So what we did is we got permission to 
open it up, and we set up probably an 
unbelievable hospital. We set up an area for 
family members. Should the need arise if the 
hospitals were inundated, that was going to be an 



F. PASCALE 22 

off-site hospital. It would have saved our 
resources as well as definitely it would have 
saved the resources from the hospital. 

These doctors were very good. Where 
they got their stuff is beyond me. But if you 
walked in there -- it took them several hours to 
set up, but they had every type of surgical, 
plastic surgeons, medical; you name it, they were 
there . 

We had a meeting with them, and we 
broke them up into teams . The teams were 
comprised of their professional -- what they 
were -- 

Q. Specialties? 

A. Thank you. I couldn't find the word. 
Their specialty. 

Then what we did is we assigned a team 
leader, and the team leader was either whatever 
EMT or paramedic we had, anybody who was very 
familiar with triage, we went over triage with 
them. They all got their little packet, and with 
the team leaders we were able to keep track of 
everybody who was at least in that place. 
Probably we wound up with 125 doctors and nurses 



F. PASCALE 2 3 

from all the hospitals. 

We probably at any given time had 75 to 
100 ambulances showing up. We finally got a 
trailer to have it like a command post and we 
were able to get that set up. That was all -- 
initially that was several hours. 

From there I think it must have been 
around -- I don't know -- 4 or 5; it was still 
very light and everything -- I got a message to 
report back downtown. They were going to have a 
meeting. I don't know how I got back downtown, 
but I was a little bit more resourceful. There 
were a lot of Fire Department vehicles over 
there. I think it was a command car. They took 
me down there. 

I was able to get down there. I left 
Pinkus there. There were a tremendous amount of 
people. There were people that were constantly 
showing up over there. We were trying to really 
manage the unit. They were all over the place. 

We had actually asked the police, 
because we were trying to stop the units from all 
the areas, as well as our own, just bypassing and 
heading down to West Street, because everybody 



F. PASCALE 2 4 

wanted to be there. It's understandable, but it 
wasn't something that really should be. If we 
needed them, then they go down there. There was 
accountability of the people. 

The only reason I kept this in my head 
is because when I was traveling down to West 
Street and after the first building collapsed, I 
really thought that a lot of chiefs may have been 
lost. To me it seemed like a very long time 
before I made any contact with anybody else. 
That really -- like, who was down there? Did we 
lose anybody? 

Not to jump back and forth, but I 
remember people saying, "We don't know where this 
chief is. We may have lost that chief." It was 
like you didn't know. You really didn't know. 
So you were really kind of working in a blind 
there, so to speak. 

So I guess when I got up to Chelsea 
that kind of stuck in my head and really stuck in 
my head to watch the people, because I lost my 
own personnel for a brief period of time, and 
they just ran in different directions. That's 
it. They just ran in different directions. 



F. PASCALE 2 5 

If we would have ran up to West Street 
or if we were there probably -- and this is 
probably one of our major discussions that my 
staff and I constantly have since this World 
Trade Center was if we got there another five 
minutes earlier, maybe even less, we would have 
been going to the command post. There's no ifs 
and buts about it. Maybe not even five minutes. 
We were right there on the corner. We happened 
to be in the car. 

Not that we joke about it, but maybe in 
the sense of releasing one's feelings about it, 
we would say, well, we're glad that it was Neal 
that did the driving as opposed to somebody else, 
because we would have gotten there much quicker. 

So these are just things to me it's 
kind of good to talk to the personnel. You 
sometimes need a little sense of a break or a 
little -- not that it's a joke or anything like 
that, but it's kind of a release and it lets 
everybody think a little bit more and release it 
out a little bit more, because I think everybody 
was kind of taken back. 

Everybody wants to be very brave and 



F. PASCALE 2 6 

very tough. That's all well and good on the 
outside, but it's really the inside that you have 
to worry about. 

So anyway, with the request for me to 
respond back down to the command post, I finally 
got down there and I remember seeing Chief 
McCracken. Probably during that whole period of 
time, "Did anybody see him?" Everybody kept on 
saying, "We don't know where he is." So when I 
saw him it was like, wow, you're okay. We kind 
of hugged each other. 

Then I saw Charlie Wells, and I didn't 
even know the type of personal disaster that he 
was going through, we were all kind of war-like 
hugging a little bit and grabbing on each hand 
and support amongst managers, I guess you would 
want to say. I remember finally seeing Chief 
Villani, you start seeing other people. 

So we were down there and we were 
talking, and they wanted to go over another plan 
to see what was going on and who was going to do 
what. Already it had to be fairly -- between 
5:00. All of a sudden for some reason people 
started to run again. 



F. PASCALE 2 7 

I was there, and I remember Chief 
Fellini looking at me, and he said, "We've got to 
get out of here real quick." I guess that's when 
the world whatever came down. 
Q. Number seven. 

A. Came down. We were standing in the 
overpass, and I said, to myself, "Boy, these 
people run awful fast. I'm still here." I 
remember saying that. Oh, my goodness. I 
remember Fellini opening up the door, jumping in 
the car, grabbing onto me and pulling me 
literally into his car. 

I remember another supervisor of mine, 
which was Lieutenant Haugh, coming up from in 
front of me, like, and we grabbed him and we told 
him, "Get in the vehicle." There was one more 
person in that vehicle, and I think it was Chief 
Butler. 

Chief Butler and Haugh jumped in the 
back of the vehicle, and myself and Chief Fellini 
was in the front. He just hopped over his seat. 
He didn't care, and I just hopped right in there. 
We closed up the windows and doors. 

I said to myself, oh, my God, I don't 



F. PASCALE 2 8 

believe it. It's scary. It wasn't as bad this 
trip, but it was three times. I said I just hope 
the fourth doesn't come down. You know what they 
say, you know -- my husband always says three 
strikes and you're out. 

That cleared at some point, and all of 
a sudden everybody just kind of walked back. It 
was the strangest feeling, like where did you 
just go? They were all jumping. I was just 
telling them, I can't do all this running. My 
knees are killing me. You just left me. First 
my staff ran away from me, and then you guys ran 
away from me. 

It was so funny, and I don't think I 
thought at that point that we were in a 
predicament either. I don't know why I didn't 
think it. But what brought it to my attention is 
I had seen Chief Fellini the following day in 
which I was assigned to the operations where 
Chief Cruthers was there -- I have to really look 
at that map to see where I really was. It was 
right by the Manhattan College. 

Q. That's Chambers and West. 

A. I think it was maybe one block down. 



F. PASCALE 2 9 

Q. Not exactly at the corner, but that's 
where . 

A. It was somewhere around that area when 
the other building came down. I remember seeing 
Chief Fellini because when I was assigned to 
another job the following day, maybe two other 
jobs the following day, and there I went to the 
operations where -- it was the pile; it was 
ground zero. 

I remember Chief Fellini turning around 
and he said, "You know, for a minute I thought 
that you all bit the dust." I looked at him, I 
said, "You know, I never even thought how 
precarious we were in again." I don't know why. 
I could not begin to tell you. 

I don't know if you could say it was 
emotional at the time. I can't really tell you. 
I can only speak for myself to the point that I 
think it was -- you could not really grasp at 
first the significance, the catastrophic 
situation . 

It took me a while, I think, and only 
really until after our first meeting with Chief 
Gombo did I really think about this as being a 



F. PASCALE 3 

terrorist act. I don't know why. Maybe you kind 
of block it out of your head. I can't really 
begin to tell you. 

I just didn't digest that until they 
were saying that and somebody was talking about 
the Pentagon and everything. That just kind of 
took my breath away, a little bit, I think. God 
Almighty, this is unbelievable. 

Also at that point I did not realize 
how many people we lost. As I was listening to 
everyone, it was a devastating feeling, a hollow 
feeling, I guess, maybe a numb feeling that some 
of these wonderful chiefs that I got to know -- I 
just couldn't believe they were not there. 

( Pause . ) 
A. Then I started to hear -- I was very 
concerned with some of the people when I was told 
that there was a lot of ambulances, a lot of 
people injured. I started to hear a couple of my 
own people -- I lost three vehicles myself. You 
couldn't help, how did those people get in there 
so fast. I want to beat them up. I did. 

I don't know. They must have been on 
heavy duty speed mode, because I could not 



F. PASCALE 31 

believe -- I mean, here you have what I had heard 
some of the people were missing. I could not 
believe somebody from Montefiore could have 
gotten down there so quickly. 

I had heard two of my employees were 
somewhat injured. They were sent over to New 
Jersey. We didn't know their status. I knew 
they weren't critical or anything like that. I 
knew two more of my employees at that time 
getting injured. 

I guess then the division mode took 
over, because I wanted to know how many of my 
people were actually involved. I said, gee, if 
they can make it from the Bronx, I know my Harlem 
people must be down there too. These are things 
that probably go really kind of search your mind 
a little bit. 

Again, a lot of this really -- as you 
really start talking about the people that were 
being lost, who was definitely lost really was -- 
there's really no words for it. There really and 
truly are no words for it. 

I would like to add that he was a great 
guy. He was the most cordial individual, funny. 



F. PASCALE 32 

He was always happy. It was good, because, you 
know, when you did the merge and everything you 
said it's good to have a relationship with these 
people. It was really very important. 

He was a wonderful person to me. And I 
say that only on the EMS side. I'm sure you have 
your own wonderful words for him on the fire 
side. But just to know him of how he was with us 
was really important. 

I could not believe Deputy Commissioner 
Feehan, I could not. And the Father, I think he 
was -- Father Judge. My response is how could 
these people have been in that building at the 
time. You just could not put it in proper 
perspective, losing these people. They announce 
the names, and people are being told that day. 

I guess it was just very hard -- you 
took it in. You just kind of took it in. You 
walked around very strong, tough, whatever you 
want to say, because I guess it's the -- through 
the years what you need to learn, especially when 
you become any level, you need to be strong for 
your people. We kind of all earned that one way 
or the other, so when you go home you're somewhat 



F. PASCALE 33 

different . 

That was the first day, the day I 
certainly really would prefer not to remember. 
But a lot of good people were saved, and we can 
only be thankful for that. That's the way it 
goes. Hopefully it never happens again. 

Q. Is there anything else you want to add 
to the events? 

A. Prior to -- 

Q. Prior to the second collapse. 

A. It's hard to say -- well, no, it's not 
hard to say. It was the most disorganized 
feeling I ever felt. I could say that there was 
no sense of being organized. It was an 
impossible thing to be organized. But even 
though you were tempted at certain points to try 
to get yourself up and running -- and they talk 
about we've always learned through the years, 
EMS, well, I guess we could throw that in the 
garbage that day. It just didn't work. It just 
didn't work. 

Just the biggest thing is you did not 
know -- people were just coming in. People were 
coming in. People coming in. You didn't know 



F. PASCALE 34 

where they were coming from. People that did not 
have uniforms. People you thought were on light 
duty wound up down there. 

You just did not have the control for 
quite some time. Certainly I don't think it was 
within the initial 24 hours because so many 
people just kept on showing up. It was like 
everything else, people had to be down there. 
That was something people had to do. 

It didn't matter if you were in the 
Fire Department or EMS, you were a volunteer, PD, 
whatever, just the strangers we had a tendency to 
bump into like just going up and down. But 
probably one of the most memorable -- 

MS. BASTEDENBECK: This is side two of 
the interview with Chief FRAN PASCALE. 
A. Just a last note, I think probably one 
of the memorable times that I remember going up 
and down West Street, if you want to call it 
going up and down, was probably the people lined 
up supporting everybody. I think that was so 
important, and it was for everyone. I think that 
was really good for our own people. They have a 
tendency to think they're not appreciated. For 



F. PASCALE 35 

whatever reason, they truly feel that. 

I remember speaking to the people when 
I was leaving there to go back to Chelsea. From 
Chelsea I wanted to go back and pick up the rest 
of my people. This is late in the evening. I 
remember just listening to people talk. And 
these were our units. These are supervisors, not 
chiefs, supervisors, looking at this and 
digesting all of this and saying, gee, we are 
appreciated. 

It was really very good at that time to 
give them support, but the support was coming 
from civilians. You're not always thanked on the 
civilian level. These people were showing up 
with flags, clapping; signs, "We love you." It 
was so supportive. That went on for the longest 
time, into the wee hours, every day, every night. 

I remember up to only maybe two weeks 
ago going down West Street and there was still a 
couple of people standing there, all by 
themselves, with their signs. Sometimes a lot of 
good comes out of some times that may be very 
bad. 

This was really very good emotionally 



F. PASCALE 3 6 

for the people who were up there, and that just 
wasn't our people; it was a lot of different 
people. PD was up there, doctors were up there. 
A lot of people were up there. There were 
firefighters up there. 

It was important to give them that 
boost, that energy, and that's what it was. It 
gave them that energy to go back down there and 
do something that nobody really ever thought they 
would have to do and dig out their own and try to 
find people alive. That helped people. It gave 
them that energy to do it, because they knew 
whatever the end result was they were going to be 
appreciated. That was even the first night. 

So I kind of remembered that, and when 
I went home I told my husband, "You just won't 
believe it. People just came out." I don't know 
where people came from. The west side is not 
that populated. They did. 

That was really very important, and it 
was very important emotionally for a lot of 
people who saw it and for people who were going 
down to the hot area, as they traveled the west 
side, was the biggest roadway that everybody used 



F. PASCALE 37 

to get down to the site. 

So it was everybody going down there 
who I think felt the importance of their job and 
that people appreciated what they were doing. 
How bad it was, they appreciated you no matter 
what . 

That was just one thing I wanted to 
add, how the public I think boosted up morale. 
That's about it. 
Q. Thank you very much, Chief. 
A. You're welcome. 

MS. BASTEDENBECK: This interview is 
concluding at 1038 hours. 



File No. 9110103 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 



PARAMEDIC LOUIS COOK 



Interview Date: October 17, 2001 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



L. COOK 2 

MS. BASTEDENBECK: Today is October 17th, 2001. The time now is 721 hours a.m. 
my name is Christine Bastedenbeck. I work 
for the New York City Fire Department. This 
morning I'm doing an interview with — 

PARAMEDIC COOK: Paramedic Louis Cook, 
Division 2, ALS coordinator. 

MS. BASTEDENBECK: Also present for 
this interview is — 

MR. ECCLESTON: Christopher Eccleston 
of the New York City Fire Department, World 
Trade Center task force. 
Q. Louie, we'd just like to ask you to 
give us your account of the morning of September 
11th, 2001. 

A. That day I started my tour at 6 a.m. I 
was in my office with Chief Basile, when he came 
out and announced that a plane had struck the 
World Trade Center. He got this information over 
his beeper. We all kind of just shrugged our 
shoulders and thought very little of it. Put on 
the news, the TV, to see whatever news station 
was on and saw the north tower burning. 
We looked at each other and decided 



L. COOK 3 

that since this looks like it was going to be a 
big job, we loaded up our equipment into the car 
and we started responding to the location. 

We went through Queens into Manhattan 
and down the FDR Drive to the World Trade Center. 
We parked the vehicle somewhere around West 
Street, I'm thinking between Albany and Cedar. 

Q. Can you just mark that with a number 1 
on the map? 

A. Sure. I'm pretty sure it was like 
right around there where we had parked the car. 
I do remember seeing Chief Carrasquillo 
with his aide in front of us parking. I remember 
seeing Chief Hirth and his aide, and I remember 
seeing Roger Moore of operations there. They 
were in the car together. 

Q. When you responded with Chief Basile, 
who else was with you? 

A. Just the chief and I. We were alone. 
We parked the car, geared up, took our 
equipment and started towards what was the — 
from what I understand to be the initial 
interagency command post. It was across the 
street on West Street in front of I believe — it 



L. COOK 4 

was like between one and two number World Trade, 
give or take. You had a very good view of number 
one. We saw number two and number three, 
actually. 

We walked up West Street northbound to 
get to the command post, and there I remember 
looking to my right and seeing an aircraft 
landing gear tire. I remember we were walking 
up, we were zigzagging through bodies and body 
parts. I just remember the smell of it being 
like a butcher shop with all the bodies around. 
I remember smelling that distinctly. 

I remember Basile turning around, 
looking at me, and just telling me, "Louis, don't 
look around. Just let's get to where we've got 
to go." 

So we got to the command post, and I 
saw Chief Kowalczyk, who was — I believe he was 
the major response chief for the evening, and 
some other EMS chiefs. I don't recall who was 
there. I can't remember the faces right now. I 
do remember him distinctly telling — stating to 
us before we even got within ten feet of the 
command post and saying, "Jimmy take tower one." 



L. COOK 5 

So we just immediately turned around 
and started walking across West Street to tower 
one. I remember a lot of debris falling from the 
southwest side, a lot of fire coming down, a lot 
of parts, a lot of debris and some bodies, some 
body parts. 

We went into the lobby to establish a 
forward command in the lobby command post. I 
remember running into Chief Pfeifer, the 1st 
Battalion chief from the Fire Department. I 
remember seeing him. We got to the command post, 
and we started to formulate matching plans. It 
was another fire chief, a deputy. There was a 
Port Authority police officer of higher rank in a 
white shirt, a sergeant. There was a New York 
City police officer there, I believe a sergeant. 
We all decided what was going to happen. 

Chief Basile asked me to find another 
egress out of number One World Trade Center. He 
wanted me to find a safe way if I could get 
civilians out and aided out if there was a way, 
even if it was covered, would be perfect. 

I went to the Port Authority sergeant 
and I asked him — I needed a cop who was 



L. COOK 6 

familiar with number one. He tapped some cop and 
told him, "Go with him and take him where he 
needs to go." 

I was going around in the lobby, and I 
was making a circle of the lobby. I wanted to 
see exactly what entrances and egresses were in 
the lobby area. I was going to go up to the 
mezzanine, and at some point I saw another 
elevated portion of stairs that went up to a 
landing and looked like it went over West Street. 

I asked the police officer where does 
this go, and he told me this was the north bridge 
to World Financial Center. It's covered and it 
goes over West Street, comes out to number one, 
and you can get out through number one to Vesey 
Street. That's this north bridge right here, 
pedestrian bridge. 

Thinking that since this was covered 
and away from the side where debris was falling, 
I figured it best I should investigate this being 
a safer area to get people out of. It just 
seemed like a good idea at the time. 

I made it up onto the — I guess you 
call it the concourse level, the mezzanine level, 



L. COOK 7 

and onto the foot bridge when I started to 
hear — I thought I heard an explosion of some 
sort, but I kind of dismissed it. I figured, ah, 
it's just something burning upstairs. I really 
didn't think of what was going on. 

Okay. I start going across this 
pedestrian bridge. I'm the only one on this 
bridge. I'm walking across it, and then I just 
remember feeling a rumble and hearing this 
rumbling sound that was really intense. It 
actually shook my bones. 

I turned around to look for the cop, 
and the cop was gone. I don't know where the 
hell he went. I didn't know which way to go. I 
knew number one was on fire. I didn't know which 
way to go because I thought now the facade or 
something from number one was coming down, 
feeling that this rumble was going on. 

So I ran. I started to run across the 
pedestrian bridge, and I got about halfway there 
when a lot of major debris was hitting the 
ground, really hitting the ground. You can feel 
it — it shook your bones, the things hitting the 
ground, the rumbling. It was extremely loud. 



L. COOK 8 

I remember everything went black. All 
the windows — because there are windows on both 
sides of this walkway — started to implode in on 
me, and ceiling tiles — they had beautiful 
ceiling tiles in this thing. I think they were 
mosaics whatever. They just started falling on 
top of me. 

I made it to about halfway, and I 
couldn't run anymore because of all of this stuff 
hitting. I decided just to lay against the 
column and just hold on, because there was 
nowhere else to go. 

It was black. I had some stuff coming 
in the window, some debris coming in the window 
on me, and I just waited there until it all 
stopped, which it felt like forever. Once it all 
stopped, you couldn't breathe because all the 
dust. There was just an incredible amount of 
dust and smoke. It seemed to linger. It didn't 
seem to settle. It just stayed that way. 

When the rumbling stopped, I got up, 
got out from all the junk, and I started 
walking — I kept going across the bridge. I 
couldn't see, so I hugged the wall that I was 



L. COOK 9 

next to and I just kept walking and I just kept 
my hand on the wall so I knew where I was. I was 
trying to feel in front of me to make sure 
nothing was going to be collapsing and there were 
no holes or voids to fall in. 

I kept going straight. I got to the 
end where World Financial Center is, and 
everything was locked. The windows were still 
intact. The doors — the security bolts were 
intact. So it was locked. I was kind of trapped 
in there. 

I turned around. I can start seeing a 
little bit now. I decided, well, I could see a 
little bit down the hall and I'm going to have to 
go back now because I can't go out this way. I 
have nothing to break these windows out with. 

As I went, I came across this painter's 
stuff, a cart and it looks like they were setting 
up to do some paint work or something. I found 
some painter's rags. I put the rag to my face. 
They had a jug like a gallon jug of water. I 
picked that up. I hosed my face off, and I 
gargled and spit. I took the jug with me, and I 
started walking back down. 



L. COOK 10 

Really I had nowhere to go. I got back 
to number one, where I met Chief Pfeifer and his 
aide. I remember that distinctly, because I know 
Chief Pfeifer's brother. They look very similar. 
Q. At this time did you know where Chief 
Basile was? 

A. No. I was totally away from him. My 
radio was the fire portable, and for a while it 
was quiet and then there was a lot of 
transmissions of maydays. I didn't want to come 
up on a mayday because I didn't feel I was 
trapped. I didn't want to interfere with 
somebody else getting rescued, so I didn't want 
to come up on the radio. 

I didn't know where he was. I had no 
idea what had gone on. I just knew some — there 
was a structural collapse of some sort. I had no 
idea of what was down, where it was. 

I got probably halfway back again to 
where I originally had to stop, give or take — I 
don't know, back between the two. I caught Chief 
Pfeifer and his aide. I gave him the jug of 
water, his aide, because he was covered in white 
powder. He wiped and gargled and rinsed off his 



L. COOK 1 1 

face. 

I think I asked Chief Pfeifer what 
happened to the command post, where is everybody, 
and he didn't have an answer. So I turned around 
and I just tagged on with him because for no 
other reason than there's safety in numbers, I 
guess. 

We turned around, went back to World 
Financial. I think the aide had some kind of 
tool with him. He either had a Halligan or he 
had an officer's tool or something, and he broke 
the window out of one of the doors. We got into 
the lobby. 

On the side of the lobby, there were 
two escape stairs that had a panic button door at 
the bottom. The dust was really heavy in there 
because it was below us and it was more 
concentrated than was up by us. 

So he broke it out, and I didn't know 
where else to go so we went out underneath the 
pedestrian bridge where you could see number two 
had been totally down. You could just see it. 
You walked out into this sea of paper and debris 
and dust that was like to me — I'm a short guy. 



L. COOK 12 

It was almost up to my knees. I was kicking this 
stuff. I just remember looking and seeing number 
two and, holy shit, look at this. I had no idea 
why number two collapsed. 

I asked Chief Pfeifer, "Do you know 
what happened to the command post?" He looked at 
me. He got up on his radio. I guess there was 
another fire command post set up. He reported in 
his position, and he reported he was with me. He 
didn't know how to report me. He said, "Who are 
you?" I said, "I'm 62 alpha," and he reported 
that to the fire command post over his radio. 

I don't know where he went. We stood 
up, because I started heading into number one 
back across West Street. It was like all this 
debris and all this stuff. I really had to 
reorient myself now because I kind of knew where 
I was but I couldn't tell where I was because 
nothing looked really the same. Geographically I 
had an idea where I was, but nothing looked 
right. 

So I waited a little while. I was 
making my way into number one again, and there 
was a problem getting into number one where we 



L. COOK 13 

went through, because debris had come down across 
that side. 

I remember seeing two civilians on an 
EMS stretcher and some EMS equipment. The guy 
ran up and looked at me and said, "Where do you 
want me to put this stuff?" I looked at him. 
I'm like, "Right here. There's nothing to do 
with this." The guy was like, "Oh, I don't know 
what to do." I was like, "There's nothing to do. 
Just don't go in the collapse zone. Just go back 
that way. " I pointed him north up West Street. 

They were out of masks. They couldn't 
find masks. They were rifling in the tech bag. 
So I gave them my shears and cut the stretcher 
sheet for masks and then they took off. 

I made it to one. I couldn't get back 
into one. I started and went around number one, 
because I didn't know which way to get in now. I 
went towards the collapse zone, because I 
figured, seeing what it was and even though it 
was down — this sounds off the wall. I would 
try to find another way to get into one to get to 
Basile. I'm not going to raise him on this radio 
because he has EMS portable, I have the fire 



L. COOK 14 

portable. 

I'm trying to get in, I'm trying to get 
back, and people are running up to me. They see 
the blue shirt. They're looking for direction, 
EMTs, guys I never saw before. They wanted 
direction. My response to them was not to go 
into the collapse zone. I told everybody that I 
encountered. They're running up with all kinds 
of equipment and junk and SAEDs. 

Go back to Vesey and West and wait on 
orders. Don't go into the collapse zone. I 
don't know what's going on over there. Just wait 
there so I know where you are. We'll get 
everybody there. These guys just — I don't know 
where they went after that. 

I was trying to get back into one. I'm 
somewhere in between one and two, and I start 
feeling that rumble again, start hearing the 
noise. I didn't look up. I figured I've been 
through this once. I know what's coming now. 

I started running north on West Street. 
Stuff just kept hitting it seemed like right 
behind me. I got to past where I was. Somewhere 
along I passed one of the tactical trucks from 



L. COOK 15 

the fire side, tac 1 or 2. I remember seeing a 
guys shoes there. I kept running past 
everything. I remember not seeing a lot of 
people. It felt like I was alone. 

I was running, and stuff was coming 
down. This time fire was coming down, because I 
could feel the heat. I grabbed a firefighter's 
turnout coat that just seemed to be in front of 
me. I grabbed it. I threw it over my shoulders. 
I didn't make it much further than that. I ended 
up diving down next to some kind of truck. I 
think it was an ambulance, a van ambulance, of 
somebody's. 

I just waited there. I just covered 
up. This stuff was really hitting the ground. 
The heavy stuff was really hitting the ground. 
It was somewhere — it was shy of Vesey. It 
really wasn't very far. I didn't make it to the 
corner. I just waited there for everything to 
stop. It was really hot, because this time there 
was fire. I know that because my neck burned. I 
was just waiting. 

I just laid there. I didn't hear 
anybody else. I didn't hear anything else. I 



L. COOK 16 

just laid there and tried to figure out where the 
hell I was going to go. I thought I was going to 
die. Once everything stopped and kind of 
settled, it was quiet. 

I knew I was facing Vesey Street, and I 
didn't know which way to go. I just stayed 
there. I couldn't breathe. I'm breathing in my 
shirt. I didn't know where to go. I start — 
laying there, I'm not dead. It's all quiet. So 
I figured, all right, now you've got to find a 
way out of here because you're going to 
suffocate. 

So I start crawling — because I can't 
see, I start crawling and doing one of these, 
sweeps in front of me so I don't hit anything. 
Somebody yells, "Is there anybody out there?" I 
was like, "Yeah. It's Cook." I yelled out, 
"It's Paramedic Cook." The response was, "Yeah, 
this is Chief -- McCarthy or McNally. I want to 
say McNally. McCarthy. 

So I yelled, "Just keep yelling. I'll 
find you." He started just calling back and 
forth his name. I remember crawling up to him, 
and I think I grabbed his arm. I grabbed him by 



L. COOK 17 

the arm. He reached out and grabbed me. We 
latched onto each other's arms. We were 
crawling, and we stood up. 

He said to me, "All right. As long as 
we make it to the water, we'll be all right." I 
was like, okay. I had an idea where the water 
is. You still can't see it because it's dark as 
a mother. You can't breathe. It's so heavy with 
smoke and dust and ash. 

I can't breathe. I have, for lack of a 
better term, dust impaction in my ears, in my 
nose. I was coughing it out of my mouth. It 
felt like I had a baseball in my mouth. I was 
just picking it out with my fingers. 

I get up. We start going. We make it 
to about — on Vesey Street. I'm looking at the 
map now, and I see number Three World Financial, 
the American Express. We got past there. On the 
north side of the street there's a bunch of 
shops. Here I just kind of fell across the wall 
where it was clear out and waited. 

Somebody ran up — I don't know. 
Somebody had water, pitchers of water. They came 
up. They splashed us with it in the face. I 



L. COOK 18 

remember coughing. He was coughing. I remember 
it was so bad I was coughing, I threw up 
everything out of my throat. 

I got up, and I didn't see anybody I 
knew. I went back towards the collapse zone, 
past the AMEX building. There were a bunch of 
EMS people there. I remember they were all 
standing there with their helmets on: our guys, 
Lenox Hill guys, a bunch of other people. They 
were setting up some kind of triage area. 

I remember a crew was loading up a 
stretcher with equipment. I walked up to them to 
find out who they were, where they were going. 
They looked at me, and they were going to start 
to treat me as a patient. I'm like, "Listen, 
don't bother with me. I'm ambulatory and fine. 
There's nothing you can do for me." 

The guys are all gearing up. They're 
loading these stretchers up with everything, with 
life-packs, some SAEDs, suction units, and they 
started marching into the collapse zone. I had 
to grab one guy. The kid was brand-new. 
Everything was brand-new. 

I said, "Are you out of your mind? 



L. COOK 19 

Stay right here. Don't go into that fucking 
collapse zone. You don't know what's going on. 
I know we've lost a building. I don't know 
what's going on. I know there's fire over there. 
It's real dangerous. You cannot go there. Stay 
here." 

One of the guys turned around and said 
to me — he was a medic. He knew my name. I 
think it was Raoul Perez. He said to me, "Louie, 
you don't understand. We've got to go in there. 
Our people are dying in there." I turned around, 
and I remember saying to him, "You're out of your 
fucking mind. Everyone's dead who was over 
there. It's unsafe. I don't know where to send 
you guys or what to do for you guys. Don't go 
there." 

They all just kind of blew me off and 
said they were formulating a plan. So I told 
them, "If you're going to send somebody, two guys 
go with a tech bag and that's it. One guy stand 
by the corner to watch them and you guys stay 
here. Don't go past the line of sight. If 
you're going to go and just go forward to see if 
there's anybody immediately right there." 



L. COOK 20 

They all kind of thought that was a 
better idea, and they left it at that. I left 
Raoul, who seemed to be taking kind of charge, 
one of the medics. 

I went back to the collapse looking for 
Basile. I thought he was dead, because I didn't 
know where he was and he didn't come up on the 
radio. I tried to find him. I went back towards 
number one. There's nothing left of number one. 
There was nothing left of number two. I didn't 
see anybody else I knew. 

I got back to one. I just looked at — 
I just remember looking at both of them, and I 
thought — I saw how bad it was and I was like, 
there's no way they got out of that frigging 
collapse. There's no way they get out. 

So I walked out and tried to see if 
there's anything standing that I could get into 
to see if I could find him. There's nobody 
there. I came back around to find those guys, 
the medics and the EMTs that I left. 

I ran into Mark Stone. Mark looked at 
me. I didn't know what to do for myself. He 
came over and gave me a big hug. He started 



L. COOK 21 

calling somebody, I think. He started washing my 
face off again. 

Then I saw Richie Zarillo, the guy 
who's (inaudible). He looked at me and as he's 
walked around of the building and he had his 
helmet on and he looked at me and — I don't know 
what he saw, but his face dropped. I just 
remember seeing his eyes light up and his jaw 
fall when he saw me. He's like oh, my God. He 
was like totally, unbelievably upset. He was 
like, "Are you all right, what happened, oh, my 
God." 

Then he asked about Basile. I said I 
don't know. I don't know where the hell he is. 
He was in one, we got separated, I went back, I 
can't find a way to get to him. He was like, 
"All right. Just stay here." He gave me a 
bottle of water or some shit, something in his 
pocket. I just remember rinsing my mouth and 
spitting and just living with that for a few 
minutes, sitting against the wall. 

I remember seeing — at that point I 
think I saw Sal Sangeniti, Pete Carrasquillo's 
aide now. He was leaning against the wall, and 



L. COOK 



22 



|l said, "Are you 
all right?" He's like, "Well, I just ran my ass 
off and whatever. " 

He said to me — he looked at me — 
"(Inaudible) and I'm having some chest pains." 
So I'm thinking to myself, oh, great, this guy's 
going to have an MI here, fuck. I said, "Sal, 
what do you want? Come on? I started telling 
him. Come on. We'll get you help. We'll get 
you taken care of." He said, "No, just leave me 
alone." He's like, "It will pass. I just want 
to be left alone." 

So I just stayed with him for a while 
and didn't say anything. I don't remember 
talking about anything. We just kind of stood 
there and looked. 



He said something funny about leaving 
to be something ridiculous like, I don't know, 
opening a deli or something silly. I kind of 
chuckled at that. 



L. COOK 23 

Q. I can picture Sal. I can picture him 



so vividly. 

A. I had to chuckle at that, because I'm 
like you know, you're right. 

Richie turned around. He stayed with 
me. He won't let me alone. He won't leave me 
go. He's standing next to me. Mark Stone I 
think went off, because I remember saying the 
MERV is close by because I thought I heard the 
generator, but I'm not sure. 

I remember a few minutes later Richie's 
face — he turned around and looked at me and he 
said, "Oh, there you are." I turned around. It 
was Basile. We hugged each other. I was 
grateful that he was there. He looked at me and 
wanted to know if I was all right. He hugged me. 
He said, "I thought you were dead." I told him, 
"I thought you were dead too. " After that we 
didn't say much more. 

We kind of got back to work. We 
brushed ourselves off, went into this hotel up on 
North End Avenue. There was a triage set-up 
going on up there. There were people getting 
triaged and treated, things going on. EMS chiefs 



L. COOK 24 

started to filter in. I remember seeing Gombo. 
I remember seeing Pascale. I remember seeing 
Pete Carrasquillo. I was happy to see Pete. 

I remember washing myself off in this 
decorative fountain in the lobby. I was very, I 
guess, from fiberglass or whatever because I 
wasn't char burned; I was red. So I just washed 
myself off, dunked my face and my head. 

We went into this conference room or 
towards the conference room, and we stopped in 
the hall. We had to formulate a plan what to do. 
I just remember the discussion. I know probably 
it wasn't my place, but I don't care. I threw in 
my two cents with things that were being said. 

The idea that I thought was very good 
was creating two casualty collection points and 
not doing anything at the site, because there's 
really nothing for our people to do right in the 
pit. They're not trained to handle this, let 
them stay on the periphery and let's have some 
outer collection sites for people. 

So Basile gets told by Gombo to set up 
at the south ferry, and we just kind of take our 
stuff and we started walking out of the hotel and 



L. COOK 25 

we start walking from North End Avenue. We 
looked. From where we are you can kind of see 
the pit and you can see the debris and everything 
going on. 

He looked at me and said, "Louis, 
there's no way we're going to make it to the 
south ferry from here walking. It's going to be 
a while." So I said to him, "Well, we'll have to 
find us some alternate transportation." We were 
outside this harbor here, the North Cove. 

I looked down, and there's these large 
vessels, these sight-seeing boats. There's a guy 
up on one of them, a deckhand of some sort, and 
he's cleaning the dust off one boat. I look at 
him. Basile doesn't know what I'm up to. I go 
down the finger planks of the dock, and I whistle 
up at him and I yell at him. He turned around 
and looks at me. I said, "Your boat and motor 
work now?" He looked at me and he said, "Yeah. 
I said, "Let's go." 

He came down and he took us down 
another dock, and he put us on a boat, on a rigid 
hull inflatable, one of those Coast Guard type 
boats, about a 20 footer. He cranks it up. We 



L. COOK 26 

told him, we have to go to the south ferry, and 
we have to get there now. So the guy just fires 
up the boat, and we go. 

We make it out into the Hudson, and 
we're going down the Hudson River. We're looking 
back, and all we see is this big cloud of smoke 
and dust. We're just like in shock, how could 
this happen. We couldn't believe what happened. 

I'm at the bow of the boat, and the 
chief is sitting at the console where the pilot 
is piloting the boat. I looked up — I don't 
know what made me look at this, but I thought it 
was funny because one of the pontoons in the back 
of the boat was flat. Something must have hit it 
and flattened it. 

I looked at it and I laughed. I said 
"Oh, great. We survived all this and now we're 
going to drown." He looked at me, and Basile's 
face lit up. He smiled and he's like, "You know, 
you're a pisser, Louis. You just do the funniest 
shit." 

So we make it to the south ferry, and 
the boat dies. They get me up to the ladder to 
climb up onto the dock, and I tell the chief, 



L. COOK 27 

"Just stay. I'll get your dock line. Don't 
worry about it." The boat dies, and they start 
drifting out into the harbor. 

I pick up all these life savers that 
they have laying on the dock with some line. I 
throw it to him and of course the line gets all 
tangled. So I just let it go. They were 
laughing because I was cursing. A Coast Guard 
boat comes by and I start waving at him, and 
they're waving at me like I'm saying hello. 
Schmucks. 

So they get the hint that the boat is 
adrift. They come back in. The guy — the prop 
was fouled on the boat. So he cleared it to get 
the boat started, brings it back up to the dock, 
and Basile climbs up the ladder, which is funny 
to see a guy his size climbing up the ladder. 

We just went to work and set up the 
south ferry. We got there, and there were 
off-duty EMS people doing some election detail 
stuff, I remember because they were wearing 
election shirts. We got there — 

Q. Do you remember who any of them were, 
Louis? 



L. COOK 28 

A. Okay, I want to say, yeah, Joan Hill 
Gardner. I know she was one. I think Bill 
Haigney was another. For the life of me, I can't 
remember. But they kept coming in. 

(Interruption.) 
A. We were in this place. The Coast Guard 
was there. They were assigned to the station at 
the terminal. I remember seeing a lot of EMS 
people coming in. The ferry was coming back and 
forth. They stopped it on the Staten Island 
side. I remember speaking with the dock master 
to hold the ferry for the moment. 

Then MEU showed up with a truck, and it 
was Richie (inaudible). We started setting up 
the folding cots and started setting up all kinds 
of equipment, like we do in MASH tents. It was 
just a lot of activity going on. 

I grabbed a Coast Guardsman. The petty 
officer and I grabbed him and said, "Where's the 
commander of the station?" He said, "I'll get 
him for you." He got the commander of the 
station. He came over. We introduced ourselves. 
I told him what we were doing. 

I told him I needed to know if they 



L. COOK 29 

were armed. He was like, "Why?" I said, "We're 
going to need armed guards in front of this place 
because I don't know what's going to happen. I 
don't know if we're going to be — if there's a 
potential for us being attacked or not or 
anything's going to happen. I need armed 
guards." 

He looked at me and he said, "This is 
an unarmed station. I can recall a patrol boat 
that's armed, but I don't have guys with guns." 
I was like all right. I asked him if they were 
trained as EMTs, and he said half the guys at 
this assignment were EMTs. 

So I told him I wanted to choke off the 
ferry terminal and have people who want to seek 
treatment to come into a choke point to come 
upstairs in the ferry terminal, be triaged, 
treated and we'll get them out. I don't want 
just civilians wandering in, uninjured. 

He agreed with me. He put his people 
into action. We had the ferry still out. I 
asked him, "Is there any way we can get in touch 
with the ferry? I need to have the ferry on our 
frequency all together. I need to have them. " 



L. COOK 30 

He said, "What do you need that for?" I said, 
"If we have to move all our patients, I'm taking 
them over to Staten Island. I will bring the 
resources from Staten Island with the ferry. At 
the very least if we have a lot of fatalities, 
we'll send them over there too." 

He's said, okay. He said, "Let me get 
the dock master. " He got the dock master. He 
got the dock master's extra radio, and we started 
listening up and we started communicating with 
each other. They brought the ferry back, which 
had people from Staten Island University Hospital 
or one of those hospitals over there. There were 
nurses, physicians, EMTs, firefighters off duty, 
cops off duty, because they were coming like with 
half uniform, half equipment and stuff. 

Some of the firemen stopped who were 
CFRD and said if they weren't needed here they 
were going to go over to the collapse. We kind 
of pointed them the way to the collapse. 

We had some units show up. I remember 
seeing two paramedics from here, Kevin Kelleher 
and Felix Marquez. They showed up. 

Basically we just waited for patients, 



L.COOK 31 

and we really didn't get any. I remember at some 
point Dr. Cherson came. I remember seeing Manny 
Delgado. I remember seeing at some point Jerry 
Bacchus. I remember seeing Phil Ashby. At some 
point McCracken and Cronin showed up. 

I remember McCracken was getting an 
abuterol treatment. Basile was needling him. 
That was pretty amazing. He kind of zinged him a 
little bit. It was funny. 

I remember seeing Roger Ahee. I can't 
for the life of me now figure out who else I saw. 
I know I saw volunteers showing up and volunteer 
ambulances. 

I started seeing the exodus of 
civilians. It was funny. I say exodus because 
when we were coming down in the boat around the 
horn of Manhattan, I remember seeing boats coming 
in, all these boats, tugboats. Every boat 
imaginable in the harbor was coming in at a full 
clip. I remember them hitting the sea walls. 

Wherever they could stop and take 
people on, they were taking them. I just 
remember seeing that. I remember tugboats just 
coming right to the wall with deck hands and just 



L. COOK 32 

pulling people. You could see some people 
bleeding, some people were injured. Some people 
were like totally lost. Wall Streeters with like 
half their clothes and no briefcase and stuff. I 
remember seeing stuff like that. They were just 
getting on the boats and going. I remember 
seeing that. 

I remember seeing tugboats and I 
remember seeing fire boats coming in. I remember 
seeing one of the harbor boats, the cops, loaded 
with cops. It was just amazing to see these guys 
coming by boat. People were just leaving on 
boats. 

The civilians would come to the ferry, 
and they were all — some of them were injured; 
some of them were not injured. Those that were 
injured just kind of came up, got wrapped up, got 
irrigated, whatever, went home. The ferry came 
back, and they held it for a while. 

Then since we weren't getting any 
patients, we cut it free. We said, all right, if 
you feel it's secure enough, take the people who 
want to go to Staten Island across. They started 
their route back and forth again, but they 



L. COOK 33 

understood we would call them immediately if we 
needed them. 

I remember one trip coming back from 
the ferry, because I took over the dock master's 
office as a command post. I remember Billy Olsen 
coming over on the ferry. He said he had a 
skating rink on the other side set up and iced 
over for a morgue. He set that up. I didn't 
know what to say about that. I just let it go. 
There was nothing I could tell him. 

That was it. We stayed there the day, 
saw next to nobody as far as patient volume, then 
we — sometime during the day — I'm assuming it 
was the latter part of the afternoon, I saw Mark 
Steffens. He finally came up, and he was a 
wreck. He gave me a big hug. He was glad to see 
me, and actually I was glad to see him. I didn't 
know where he was. He told me his story. He was 
really shaking, I remember. 

We got a message we had to go to 
Chambers and West, there's an interagency meeting 
happening immediately. So we had to find a way 
back to get Basile's car, if it was even there. 
I don't know how the hell we got there. I don't 



L. COOK 34 

even know how we got — I don't think we walked 
back, but I don't know how we got back to 
Basile's car, to get his car. I don't know. I 
don't know how we got from one place to the 
other. 

We were walking up West Street, because 
we came south — yeah, it was just a couple 
blocks away. We went through Whitehall Street. 
We came south again from the towers. We tried to 
find the car. It was amazing to see just what 
was all over the place. Buildings burning 
without any fire suppression or anything going 
on. 

It was amazing. It was just chaos, 
just junk and cars crushed. The bodies that I 
remembered seeing on West Street when we were 
going up to the command post originally were just 
kind of like covered up. They were all covered. 
I remember just thinking where all the bodies 
are. I'm walking around now and I can't see 
them. 

We found Bobby Brown's car, which was 
Billy Day's burned. Billy's probably pissed. 
Nose smashed in pretty well. I crawled and 



L. COOK 35 

popped the trunk lid and took his bag and left 
everything else, personal effects, there. 

We just tried to find our car. We 
found it eventually. It took us a while because 
everything just didn't resemble what it was. We 
found it. It was covered in dust and soot. 
Without exaggerating, a foot and a half of dust 
on the car. You just couldn't tell whose car was 
whose. The only way we found it was he said, 
"I'll try this one," and he stuck the key in 
there and the cylinder turned. It was ours. 

We brushed off the debris and the dust. 

(Interruption.) 

MS. BASTEDENBECK: We're continuing the 
interview with Paramedic Louis Cook. 
A. We went back around to the south ferry. 
We picked up Mark Steffens. I was in the car 
with Chief Basile. I have no idea who else was 
in the car. I know the car was packed because we 
were shoulder to shoulder. I can't remember who 
else was in the car. 

So we dropped off some stuff, started 
up the FDR Drive, got off — actually the service 
road of the FDR Drive. We came around by 1 Truck 



L. COOK 36 

by South Street and I can't think of the cross 
street, like Beaver or something. We started 
weaving our way through the streets because we 
just had no idea where we could get around. 

We finally made it up to Chambers and 
Greenwich. We went up to Chambers and Greenwich 
through this mess. Driving through this was like 
nuclear winter with all the dust and everything 
else. We got to Chambers and Greenwich, and the 
chief turns around and says, "There's number 
Seven World Trade. That's the OEM bunker." We 
had a snicker about that. We looked over, and 
it's engulfed in flames and starting to collapse. 

We're kind of caught in traffic and 
people and things, and everything's going on. We 
hear over the fire portable, "Everybody evacuate 
the site. It's going to collapse." Mark 
Steffens starts yelling, "Get out of here! Get 
out of here ! Get out of here ! We've got to go ! 
We've got to go! It's going to collapse." 

I turned around, and I piped up real 
loud and said, "Stay in the frigging car. Roll 
the windows up. It's pancake collapsing. We'll 
be find. The debris will quit and the cloud will 



L. COOK 37 

come through. Just stay in the car. " We pulled 
the car over, turned around and just watched it 
pancake. We had a dust cloud but nothing like it 
was before. 

We ended up, up the street at the 
command post, and it was a sea of people. For 
the life of me, I can't tell you who was there. 
I just don't know. Everyone was chattering and 
talking about this and about that. No one really 
had any stories. It was just like business. I 
just remember that. 

He looked at me after the meeting at 
the interagency meeting. I remember seeing Ron 
Pfeffer at the command board doing tracking, 
doing tracking and stuff. I spoke to him for a 
moment. 

That was it. They sent us home later 
that night from the command post, and we came 
back the very next morning very early back at the 
World Trade Center. I came here. I don't 
remember if Basile picked me up or I took the 
car. I remember we met up down there. We were 
there together. I don't remember from there. We 
stayed for days doing our job. 



L. COOK 38 

That's pretty much it. That's pretty 
much it. 

Q. Is there anything else you would like 
to add to the events prior to 1 1 :00 that morning? 

A. There was just so much going on. I 
speak about it and then something else will pop 
in my head, things that I can remember. 

After the collapse I just had a 
disturbed feeling that I knew we lost people, a 
lot of people, EMS people. I started thinking 
about that and I thought about all my friends 
that I've known for years. 

I started thinking, well, where's my 
sister, because my sister's a cop. I'm like, 
great, I don't know where she is, I don't know 
where anybody is, I don't know what's going on. 

It was very, very disturbing. I have 
no bravado. I've seen plane crashes and all the 
jobs and stuff. I've never quite seen some of 
the things there that seem to overwhelm my 
thoughts. 

I don't know what else to say I don't 
know what else to say. I feel like I haven't 
really contributed much. It's just a lot, I 



L. COOK 39 

guess, a lot of that going on. I really can't 
think of a lot else. 

I don't remember seeing — I remember 
seeing some fire officers and I remember seeing 
Fire Patrol, the guys with the red helmets. It's 
sad that we lost all those guys. Basile I think 
at one point said — 
(Interruption.) 

A. I can't recall anything else. I know 
Chief Fanning was with us or Chief Galvin was 
with us at some point at the command post. 
Actually that's what Chief Basile told me. 

That was it. I just really can't 
remember much. Everything seems like a blur. I 
get these moments where I remember something. 
That's about it. I can't really add. I wish I 
had more information for you. 

MS. BASTEDENBECK: Okay. This 

concludes our interview with Paramedic Louis 

Cook. The time now is 816 a.m. 



File No. 9110104 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
PARAMEDIC STEVEN PILLA 
Interview Date: October 17, 2001 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



S. PILLA 2 

MR. ECCLESTON: Today's date is October 
17th, 2001. The time is 11:27. My name is 
Christopher Eccleston of the New York City 
Fire Department. I'm conducting an 
interview with the following individual. 

Please state your name, title and 
assigned command of the New York City Fire 
Department in regards to the events of 
September 11, 2001. 

PARAMEDIC PILLA: My name is STEVEn 
Pilla. I'm one of the ALS coordinators for 
Division 6 EMS. 

Q. STEVE, were you assigned to the World 
Trade Center disaster on September 11th, 2001? 
A. Yes. 

Q. Could you please tell me in your own 
words about the events surrounding that day? 

A. Well, let's see, in the morning I got 
to work like usual. I heard that there was an 
explosion -- I heard the radio on citywide in the 
office. So we heard the lieutenant on the scene 
screaming that he needs every available 
ambulance. 

It was very interesting because I was 



S. PILLA 3 

at that explosion in '93. I was on the street at 
that point. I remember when they sent us down 
there, we turned to citywide. It was a very 
similar conversation from that lieutenant: Give 
me everything you've got here. Smoke coming out 
of the world -- I thought that it was a tape on. 
They said no, there was an explosion. We turned 
the TV on. Sure enough, the tower was on fire. 
As we're watching the TV, we saw the 
second plane hit. I'm like, is that another 
plane that hit? Like God, one could be, two is 
no longer an accident. The chief rounded us all 
up, and we started heading down. 

Q. Which chief? 

A. Chief Pascale. 

We took the Henry Hudson Parkway. 

Q. Can you just tell me the other 
personnel that you were with? 

A. It was myself; Neil Sweeney, who is 
vacation relief right now for the other 
coordinator who is out on refresher; Amedegnato, 
who is one of the chief's aides here, EMT; 
Lieutenant Cahill, who was the officer in charge 
in the division; and Chief Pascale herself. 



S. PILLA 4 

All five of us got into the car with 
some equipment and took off down there. We got 
to the Henry Hudson from Jacobi. We hit a lot of 
traffic. It was at that point I think they 
already realized that this was some sort of 
attack. After getting through barricades and 
then smooth sailing, to find more barricades. We 
kept getting delayed getting down there. 

We finally get to the end of the West 
Side Highway. As we turned, we could see both 
towers on fire. This brought back from '93 when 
I got there all the smoke coming out, glass 
breaking and stuff. I had no idea what we were 
going to face. 

As soon as we got there, we just passed 
one of the walkway bridges just past Stuyvesant 
High School. There's a walkway bridge. We just 
passed that, got to Vesey. The chief was saying 
we have to find the chief, find the command 
center at West and Vesey. 

We see this plume, come down in front 
of us. Originally I thought basically it was the 
facade of the building that came down. We made a 
quick right. I looked behind me. Neil was 



S. PILLA 5 

driving, I wasn't; I was in the back. I looked 
behind me. I could see this plume of shit just 
chasing us. They're looking for a place to park, 
and I'm going, "Keep going. Keep going. Don't 
stop." It finally overtook us to the point we 
couldn't see where we were driving. 

We parked the car, and then we got out, 
got our helmets. We were getting ash and stuff 
coming onto us, this dark plume. One of the 
firemen who now works as a medic for one of the 
private hospitals, he comes out and sees me. 

Q. Do you know his name? 

A. I'll give it to you later as soon as 
I -- 

Q. Okay. 

A. He comes out and he goes, "STEVE." I 
said, "What?" He couldn't find his partner. I'm 
looking to him and saying to myself, you can't 
find him? I'm thinking the worst. Then someone 
else was coming out of the plume. The lieutenant 
and Neil went to get them and came out. 

Then we all had to leave because it was 
getting darker and darker and stuff was getting 
bigger and bigger. So we all took off I find out 



S. PILLA 6 

in different directions. We couldn't find 
anybody for a while. 

We found an ambulance and got some 
paper masks to wear for the ash. But it was 
really dark, like nighttime, just waiting until 
this stuff goes over. I remember after the 
darkness went away I could see the sun coming 
through the sky. I guess the building was no 
longer blocking the sun. 

We walked around. I believe now it was 
close to water. It was towards the American 
Express building, I'd say, or Merrill Lynch, one 
of these buildings. 
Q. Okay. 

A. The ambulances started coming around 
from the side. They just filled with all the 
debris from the tower. The MERV took off with 
its doors open, the steps on it, bouncing down 
the street. I was like, hmm, this is not a good 
thing . 

We managed to set up some triage, get 
ALS up. Then we found the chief, found the 
lieutenant, found Amedegnato and Neil and tried 
to get the ambulances together, around the 



S. PILLA 7 

corner, staged. I remember on one ambulance 
there was an hysterical EMT in the back that 
couldn't find her partner. 

Q. Do you remember who that was? 

A. I don't know who she was. She was 
looking for her partner Patrick. 

Q. Do you know Patrick who? 

A. Sorry. 

Q. Okay. That's fine. 

A. So how she's looking for her partner. 
She wanted to go back. I told her -- someone was 
with her. I said, "You've got to hold her here. 
Hold her. Don't let her go back." Obviously we 
had a big disaster. Like ten minutes later her 
partner walked up. I said, "Go hug your partner. 
She misses you. " 

We set up a triage area in the lobby of 
the building. I'm still trying to figure out 
what building we were in. I believe it was the 
Winter Garden building. That's the only one I 
can think of. So we're in that building. People 
started coming in filled with ash and choking and 
respiratory problems. But no one was really 
hurt. So we were taking care of that. 



S. PILLA 8 

Then they said the building was coming 
down, the other tower. We need to leave. So we 
all took off. The people who I was taking care 
of who couldn't walk got out the door before I 
did. It was unbelievable. 

You could hear the roar. Outside you 
could hear the roar of the building coming down. 
It just slowly got faster and faster. It was 
unbelievable. It was like a freight train. 

You go around the corner only to be 
greeted by another plume of smoke from the other 
building. So now ambulances were taking off, and 
one ambulance stopped and said, "STEVE, get in 
the ambulance." I jumped in, and we waited there 
until it settled. No big debris came towards us. 
It was just the dust and dirt. When that kind of 
settled, you could see the light again. 

I popped out, went back into the same 
building, which wasn't as damaged, and did triage 
again. There were more and more people in there. 
There was a girl with a broken leg. She got 
blown just from the force of the ash. She kept 
going down from the force of the ash. We ended 
up treating her. She was stable. 



S. PILLA 9 

There was a chief in there, a fire 
chief, with a broken shoulder and bloody nose. I 
was going down the line triaging people. They 
were upset, they were bent. People with no shoes 
on I guess from running out of the tower. 

A fire chief comes over to me and says, 
"Listen, son. There was a terrorist attack. 
This building's next, because they know they're 
going to start attacking other buildings." He 
had a very good point there, because you're 
always waiting for the next attack. This is a 
terrorist act. 

So I got my chief and decided to go 

into Stuyvesant High School. At that point I was 

going to get the fire chief 
out, to an ambulance, 

get him out of the way. There was a Port 

Authority cop who crashed on us. He was doing 

fine, the next minute he had no blood pressure. 

We got him out to an ambulance. 

Q. What kind of injuries did he have? 

A. Nothing obvious, but it must have been 
the shock from the whole thing, or an internal 
thing is possible. Maybe mashed, he might have 
been squished, hit by something, and not even 



S. PILLA 10 

know it. We got him in an ambulance and got him 
out to a hospital. 

Q. Do you know who his name was? 
A. Maybe this happened -- the time period 
is like within an hour. It's amazing. On the 
map I see now we actually ran towards the other 
buildings instead of running away from 
everything. 

At that point we're getting everything 
together, and now we're going to move to 
Stuyvesant High School. Somebody comes in and 
says there's a gas leak, there's explosions going 
on, we have to evacuate. 

So now we're all running out of the 
building again. The 20 people I'm treating again 
beat me to the door. I have no idea where these 
20 people are. Someone is running around with a 
triage cage around their neck. 

So we run out. You try not to hear the 
explosions in the background, things just blowing 
up; vehicles, I guess, that were on fire from the 
debris or if there were gas leaks. You could 
hear them getting closer and closer, so there was 
a good possibility there were gas explosions. 



S. PILLA 11 

I get into Stuyvesant High School and 
the dust settles. You calm down. You figure 
you're safe now. Somebody comes in yelling there 
are gas explosions coming towards the high 
school, we need to evacuate. 

At this point you have hundreds of 
people running into this high school. Now you're 
evacuating again. Once you get yourself 
together, you had to run. You just kept doing 
that for like the first hour. We just kept 
running until I could see the buildings. We're 
about this big. About an inch. Okay. Now 
everybody's safe. What do they do, the rule of 
thumb. But I used my pinky, though. 

We stayed there on the corner for the 
longest time. Sure enough, people were still 
coming out of that portion with ash on them and 
problems breathing. I took my oxygen tank with 
me. It's like my safety blanket. Everywhere I 
was going I was giving oxygen to people to get 
themselves back together. There were 20 people 
just stopping, giving them oxygen, and going to 
the next one. 

A Port Authority cop came out. Their 



S. PILLA 12 

suits are dark blue. He was white. His whole 
suit was pure white. They set up their own 
triage area in another high school, one of the 
colleges. 

Q. Across the street from -- 
A. No, it's down the block. So they're 
there for the longest time, because they needed 
some supplies, needed ambulances. The radios 
were not working. We had a radio with us. But I 
knew there was a triage area and transport area 
two blocks from there. They had like ten 
ambulances. Another triage and transport area 
down the other road with MERVs and ambulances. 
So we were basically running back and forth where 
they need an ambulance, playing gofer. Somebody 
just needed a gofer to go back and forth. 

We went upstairs to the (inaudible). 
It was in the auditorium, like a gym. They had 
doctors that had come in from all over, doing 
treatment. Great. Some EMTs showed up from 
Hazollah . They were in there. A lot of walking 
wounded. No one with real life-threatening 
injuries. But then again I kind of figured that 
because all the life-threatening injuries were in 



S. PILLA 13 

the rubble. 

So strange we had all these triage 
areas set up and we were getting dribs and drabs. 
There were no real patients. You think people 
would get out of the muck; right? It was like 
walking wounded or dead. That was basically it. 
There was no one or few critical. When the first 
building came down, we did. When the second 
building came down, it was even less. 

It was kind of strange, we had a 
tugboat set to go to Jersey with a frequency how 
to get in touch with them. We had doctors at 
another triage area. But there were no patients. 

(Interruption . ) 
A. Then it was about 5:00, because I was 
getting hungry. We were eating oatmeal cookies 
and watered-down Gatorade from the Salvation Army 
and the Red Cross. They were great. They had 
plenty of food. But we were getting hungry. 

We walked back. We didn't do any 
further because building number seven was coming 
down. That was another problem, to wait for 
building seven to come down, because that was 
unsecure. It was about 5:30 that building came 



S. PILLA 14 

down . 

Again another plume of smoke. Again if 
you got too close you had to start running again. 
In the plumes there was like big debris, small 
debris, not to mention whatever contaminants were 
in it . 

We finally got to ground zero, Chambers 
and West. I met Al, who was in refresher who was 
now sitting down there with an ambulance full of 
patients. He got sent to the pharmacy. So I was 
standing there for a while, looking at the MERV. 
Again, there was not a lot of patients coming in, 
just people coming in with ash in their eyes. 
That was it. 

We didn't do much, to tell you the 
truth. I was just walking around aimlessly, 
because there was nothing much to do. You sat 
there. You were amazed. You just lost two 
buildings and possibly 50,000 people at most, if 
not maybe about 10,000 if they got the buildings 
evacuated. You just watched 10,000 people die. 
Unbelievable. 

I remember going back into the high 
school and got some food. At that point it 



S. PILLA 15 

really hit, I'm hungry and thirsty. I get 
headaches when I don't eat, so I was getting this 
bad headache. 

The only thing I remember is walking 
around and it's like five inches of ash and 
paperwork from everyone's office. Some were 
burnt, so you imagine where that paperwork came 
from. People's personal memos, financial 
records, everything, on the street. 

It was about 7, 7:30 we finally 
contacted the chief. We had lost her. We didn't 
know where she was. She didn't know where we 
were. She came back to ground zero, and we met 
her. She got all of us together, and we went 
back to our car to get back here. 

We got back to the car. It was filled 
with ash. It was like it snowed. We didn't even 
wipe the car off before you got in the car. It 
was ash; it wasn't even snow. It even managed to 
get inside the car. It was totally unreal. 

I remember somebody saying to 
everybody, "Don't forget to fill out an exposure 
form when you get back." God only knows what was 
in that. You could feel the fiberglass on your 



S. PILLA 16 

arms. You knew it was like pulverized glass and 
fiberglass. Everything was pulverized. 

We got back here and chilled out, went 
home, hugged my wife, ditched my clothes, and 
came back to try to see what to do the next day. 
I've been in the office since. I've never gone 
back down to ground zero. Some day I do want to 
go back there just to actually physically see 
where it was, where I was running to. In the 
whole maze, you're just running and running and 
you don't see where you're going. 

I know when I ran out the building the 
building was falling. I looked to the right, and 
the plume was coming towards us. I looked to the 
left, and I said I can't go back that way because 
the building (inaudible). I can't go this way, 
to the right; I can't go left. I hope my helmet 
works. That's all I've got left. From the looks 
of things, it's not going to work too well. So 
that's when an ambulance pulled up and said hop 
in. 

That's about it. I spent the rest of 
my time trying to get myself back together again. 
Today is the first day I actually got myself on a 



S. PILLA 17 

normal schedule. It's over a month. 

A plane passes over, you hear -- the 
only other plane -- I'm in Westchester. The 
airport closes at 12 midnight it's 2:00 in the 
morning, and I hear this roar of a plane go by. 
It's the same rumble. I was dreaming about this 
building falling down, with the smoke and all. 
That's my story. 

Q. Is there anything else you would like 
to add to this in regards to the events that 
happened prior to 12 noon? 

A. No, I pretty much gave you every detail 
I could imagine. 

Q. Thank you very much for conducting this 
interview with me. 

MR. ECCLESTON: This interview is being 

concluded at 1147 hours. 



File No. 9110105 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMS CHIEF JAMES BASILE 
Interview Date: October 17, 2001 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



J. BASTILE ; 

MS. BASTEDENBECK: Today is October 
17th, 2001. The time is 839 hours. My name 
is Christine Bastedenbeck from the New York 
Fire Department. I'm here to conduct an 
interview with the following individual. 

CHIEF BASILE: Chief JAMES BASILE, 
B-A-S-I-L-E, EMS operations, EMS Division 2 
commander . 

MS. BASTEDENBECK: Also present for the 
interview -- 

MR. ECCLESTON: Christopher Eccleston 
from the New York City Fire Department World 
Trade Center disaster task force. 
Q. Chief, I'm just going to ask you if you 
can recount the events of September 11th, 2001. 

A. I first became aware of the World Trade 
Center incident from my staff, who was watching 
the morning news. They had turned on the news, 
and we had seen the original plane had struck 
tower number one of the World Trade Center. At 
that point we started to monitor the radio 
activities here, the CAD job. 

Within a few minutes, the other 
building was struck. At that point I called the 



J. BASTILE ■ 

Citywide Dispatch Supervisor, informing them we 
were available if necessary. I felt at that 
point based on the magnitude of the incident that 
I should respond. 

So I responded from Division 2's office 
with paramedic Louis Cook. We traveled Pelham 
Parkway onto the Hutchison River Parkway to the 
Whitestone Bridge, where we had seen the 
magnitude of the incident outplayed firsthand. 
From the Whitestone Bridge, we entered the 
Whitestone Expressway onto the Van Wyck 
Expressway onto the Long Island Expressway, where 
we started to take a real perspective of the 
incident because of the closer we had gotten. 

By the time we reached the Queens 
Midtown Expressway, that perception now before 
the tunnel, we had seen how big it really was. 
My greatest fear was additional attacks at that 
point, knowing past history with terrorists and 
how they operate. 

By the time we got to the tunnel, there 
must have been 20-25 vehicles behind us, a few 
cars in front of us. Chief Hirth was in front of 
us. Chief Carrasquillo was also in front of us. 



J. BASTILE i 

We got into the tunnel. We had clear access into 
the tunnel and onto 34th Street and the FDR 
Drive. 

We traveled the FDR Drive, came through 
the tunnel down in lower Manhattan and out onto 
the West Side Highway. I parked the vehicle at 
approximately West Street and I believe it was 
Albany to Carlisle. It might have been Albany. 

Q. Can you just indicate with the 
number 1? 

A. Carlisle to Rector or Albany. I'm 
going to put a 1 here. 

I exited the vehicle with all my 
appropriate gear and walked up to the command 
post, which was located adjacent to the Winter 
Garden theater at that point. I met with Chief 
Jerry Gombo and Chief Walter Kowalczyk and was 
directed to go into the lobby of number One World 
Trade Center at that point. The buildings are 
still up and intact. 

Louis Cook and I went in together. We 
found out it was very dangerous entering the 
premise, that there was numerous parts of the 
building and other foreign bodies being thrown 



J. BASTILE E 

around from the higher floors. 

We entered the lobby. There I met 
Citywide Truck Commander Joseph Callan, Fire 
Division 1 Commander Chief Hayden and Fire 
Battalion 1 Joe Pfeifer, Safety Battalion Chief 
Stephen King, Father Judge, and OEM Port 
Authority officials in the command post within 
the lobby of number one. 

We were looking to effect a way of exit 
for personnel in the building and a place where 
we could establish treatment sites. I advised 
the incident commander that was in the Trade 
Center with me that access from the front of the 
building was inappropriate and that we should 
look for other exits. That's when I sent Louis 
Cook with a Port Authority cop to find a 
different access for civilians and public safety 
personnel to come in on. 

We were operating in the lobby, and all 
of a sudden we heard the roar of a jet engine, is 
what it sounded like. We thought that there was 
another plane coming into the building. We went 
from the lobby area into an elevator bank area -- 
escalators that led into the concourse area. So 



J. BASTILE I 

there was essentially a wall that we went around 
from the command post area to the escalator area. 

Not two seconds later debris and dust 
started to come in, and essentially we were just 
shut down. Everything was dark, pitch-black. 

Q. Before the collapse, was the lobby 
still lit? 

A. The lobby was functional. When I first 
arrived there, there appeared to be a lot of 
people there. The Port Authority had set up some 
type of chain to help lead people out. I would 
say within the last two minutes before building 
two had fallen that the bulk of the people were 
out of the lobby and it was essentially just the 
Fire, Port Authority and OEM personnel with me. 
The lobby was essentially clear. 

Q. Did you go into any of the stairways or 
did you stay in the lobby? 

A. I just stayed in the lobby at that 
point. We heard the roar of the jet -- what I 
thought was a jet coming in, and I believe the 
others did, and we went into the escalator area 
for shelter. 

Everybody got down on the ground. 



J. BASTILE "i 

There was some debris that fell. There was a lot 
of soot and dust. It was pitch-black. The only 
light that we had was the handheld lanterns, and 
there was a photographer, a video crew that was 
following one of the battalion chiefs, that he 
provided some light. 

All access to the lobby area was cut 
off, and any egress from that level was cut off. 
I opted to grab a hold of a Port Authority cop 
who knew the building well and ask for another 
way out. We ventured to take the escalator up 
into the concourse level. 

I went up to the concourse level. All 
the glass had been shattered out at that point. 
We were able to get out. I saw people starting 
to come out from the building on the concourse. 
I met with Fire Battalion Chief Turner and a few 
other firemen -- I don't know their names -- and 
assisted in moving patients, civilians, out. 

I did some quick treatment of a couple 
of patients. One gentleman had a severe gash to 
his forearm. I don't know how, but he had gauze 
with him. So I wrapped him up. I effectively 
was able to bring out about 300 civilians from 



J. BASTILE 8 

the building at that point in the matter of, I 
guess, 12, 15 minutes. 

We were helping people over large areas 
of debris and channelling them, trying to keep 
them calm, bringing them over to a walkway that 
led to number Seven World Trade Center. 

When the majority of the civilians were 
out, I waited a few minutes. There was nobody 
else coming out. I had a feeling, a gut feeling 
inside that it was time for me to leave. So I 
started walking. I went over the walking bridge 
to number seven. I went into the second level or 
the main lobby of number seven and walked down 
the escalator. 

As I was approaching the corner of West 
and Vesey, I heard over the radio that the 
building was leaning. As I was crossing West 
Street, that's when I heard that jet sound again. 
I knew that the building was coming down. I made 
it about -- somewhere between West and North End 
there was a fence, approximately, I guess, 200 
feet or maybe 100 yards away. I decided to use 
that as a wall to protect myself from any debris, 
not knowing what the extent of the magnitude was 



J. BASTILE 9 

going to be. 

I brought a couple of civilians down 
with me, a couple of firefighters, I brought them 
close to the ground. I covered them with my 
turnout coat with me. I essentially waited and 
figured that was it, it was all over, because of 
the proximity to where we were to where the 
building was. 

It went down, got filled with this dust 
and dirt, debris, again, this cloud. I opened up 
my eyes. It was total darkness I guess for about 
two, three minutes. I thought I guess this is 
what it's like to be dead. Then I heard a woman 
screaming next to me, and I said I guess we're 
still all here. So that was good. 

We waited until we were able to see a 
little light. I was able to get the woman up. 
We went into a bagel store which was located at 
North End and Vesey, where we took some water. I 
gave her water and a couple other people. At the 
back of the deli counter in the kitchen area, 
they had like a little portable shower, I guess a 
dish shower. We hosed each other down. 

I went into a building off of River 



J. BASTILE 10 

Terrace, I believe, and Vesey where a lot of the 
chiefs had regrouped. I met with Chief 
Kowalczyk, Gombo. I don't remember the other 
chiefs that were there at the time. Essentially 
we were trying to put a plan together of what we 
were going to do. 

I was directed at that point to set up 
a treatment site over at the ferry terminal. 
Louie Cook and I, we wound up finding each other. 
I thought he was a goner too. I didn't know 
where he was. I thought it was all over. 

We met, and we took a few minutes out. 
I told Louis, I said, "We're not going back to 
the West Side Highway. We're going to walk 
around if necessary." So we were walking down 
North End. We were down by the yacht harbor. 
Louie Cook saw a boatsmate who was sweeping 
debris off of one of the boats. 

He called out to the boatsmate and 
asked him, "Do you have a dingy?" The guy said, 
"Yeah, what do you need?" He said, "Well, we 
need a ride out to the ferry terminal." He said, 
"Okay." So we wound up having a zodiac 
inflatable boat. 



J. BASTILE 11 

Actually it was a good respite because 
we were able to get away from the scene for a 
little bit and clear our heads and the air was 
clear and we were able to see the magnitude of 
what had just happened with us. 

We got into the zodiac, and we traveled 
down the Hudson River to the MIL, the marine 
input center, the Coast Guard station, where they 
dock their vessels. Of course Louie got off, and 
he was going to hold the boat for me, and then we 
got carried out into the water. Then something 
jammed in the propeller, so we're stranded out 
there. 

I saw some Coast Guard or some New York 
City cops in another zodiac. I tried to wave 
them down, and they zipped by. Five minutes 
later Louie is trying to throw me a life 
preserver on a rope, which got about two feet off 
of the pier. It was comical, to say the least. 
He was able to unwrap the rope from the 
propeller, and we got started again. I got up 
the ladder, and I exited. 

At that point we went over to the ferry 
terminal. There were some EMS crews there 



J. BASTILE 12 

already. I'm not positive whether I met 
Dr. Cherson at that point or if it was slightly 
thereafter, but in essence we took over the 
second floor of the ferry terminal and we 
established a medical treatment site. 

We had moved all the benches out. We 
had prioritized all the areas as far as 
treatments. A number of physicians and health 
care professionals had come in, civilians from 
the street. Dominic Maggiore was there at the 
time and helped set up the treatment and staging 
areas. 

Essentially I spent the best part of 
the day there, trying to get things established, 
thinking that there was going to be a mass exodus 
to the ferry terminal, patients looking for 
treatment, at least everybody going back to 
Staten Island. 

In essence we didn't treat that many 
patients. We did about five transports, one 
being Deputy Chief Robert Browne. He had 
staggered in. He had severe conjunctiva of both 
eyes and some back pain. He was immobilized and 
transported to Penninsular General. 



J. BASTILE 13 

About 4:30 I was asked to go over to 
the command post which is located at Chambers and 
West, so I had gotten together -- I was with Mark 
Steffens, Fred Villani and Louie Cook. We picked 
up the car, brushed it off. There was about four 
or five inches of dust on the car. 

We traversed around the east side of 
Manhattan, tried to get to Chambers and West. We 
had gotten to -- I don't know what street this 
is -- Washington. We were at Washington and 
Chambers when we saw number seven come down. 
That was about 5:20. We watched that come down. 
We watched this plume of smoke coming at us. 

I just drove up the block, and I said, 
"Everybody stay in the car." We waited for 
everything . 

We went to the command post. I was 
shot for the day. I had severe conjunctiva. I 
couldn't breathe. I came back at 6 the next 
morning . 

Q. Anything else you want to add? 
A. That's it. I think everybody's story 
is going to tell it. 

MS. BASTEDENBECK: This concludes the 



J. BASTILE 14 

interview. The time now is 855 hours. 
Thank you, Chief. 



File No. 9110106 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
LIEUTENANT JOHN NEVINS 
Interview Date: October 17, 2001 



Transcribed by Elisabeth F. Nason 



J. NEVINS 

MR. RADENBERG: Today's date is October 17, 
2001. The time is 1327 hours. I'm Paul Radenberg 
of the Fire Department of the City of New York. 
Q. Conducting an interview with? 
A. Lieutenant JOHN NEVINS, New York City Fire 
Department, assigned to fire operations. 

Q. We are conducting this interview at 9 
Metrotech, fourth floor, in the BITS interview room, 
regarding the events of September 11, 2001. 

A. On September 11, I was at my job location at 
9 Metrotech, 7th floor. At approximately 8:35, 8:40, 
somebody announced in the office that a plane had 
struck the World Trade Center, at which time, we looked 
out the window. We could see that there was a large 
hole in one of the towers of the World Trade Center. 

I proceeded with Lieutenant Bradley Mann down 
to the EMS operations area, obtained radios, and began 
to respond to the assignment. 

We exited 9 Metrotech from the front doors, 
proceeded around to the garage area where we met 
Citywide Chief Sal Cassano, exiting the garage. We got 
into his car and responded into Manhattan. I believe 
he went -- I'm not sure which way he went through 
Brooklyn, but he arrived at the Sand Street entrance to 



J. NEVINS 

Brooklyn Bridge, proceeded over the Brooklyn Bridge 
into lower Manhattan. 

We exited the car. I believe the Chief 
parked at West and Vesey Street. Actually, the map is 
more (inaudible). I believe this is Broadway. 
Q. Yes, this is West Broadway. 

A. Yes, West Broadway, behind the US Post Office 
Federal Office Building across the street from the 7 
World Trade, Lieutenant Mann and myself began down 
towards West Street on Vesey. Chief Cassano exited the 
vehicle and I believe he headed towards Church Street. 
That was the last I saw of him until Thursday. 

As we turned the corner and were standing in 
front of 7 World Trade, the second plane struck tower 
number 2. Lieutenant Mann and myself paused 
momentarily to find some shelter in front of 7 World 
Trade under an overpass. We then proceeded once we 
were safe farther down Vesey Street to the corner of 
West Street, where we took over West and Vesey staging. 

We began staging ambulances on Vesey Street 
between West and North End Avenue. I'm not sure of the 
exact number of ambulances, somewhere between 20 and 30 
had arrived from numerous agencies; Lenox Hill, 
Cabrini, FDNY. Also at this location a MERV was staged 



J. NEVINS 

approximately between 3 World Financial and 12 World 
Financial. There is a parking lot in front of the 
Embassy Suites Hotel. We staged in the street facing 
North End Avenue. 

From there we spent -- at that point, from 
the staging location, we remained there staging 
ambulances until the collapse of 2 World Trade Center. 
Just prior to the collapse of 2 World Trade Center, 
probably 5 to 10 minutes, Chief Fred Villani arrived at 
our location and he was transitioning into taking over 
the staging at that location. 

At that point 2 World Trade Center began to 
collapse. I was directed by Chief Villani to run, at 
which time we continued down Vesey Street on to North 
End Avenue. Following the collapse, we attempted to 
regroup, shuttle ambulances down on to North End and 
reestablish the staging location at that area. 

For approximately 10 to 15 minutes we 
continued to do that until we were told that -- I 
believe at the direction of the police, that that area 
was probably unsafe due to the impending collapse in 
number 1 World Trade Center. 

At that point, I continued down North End 
Avenue towards Murray Street. At that point I entered 



J. NEVINS 

a construction trailer, I believe located between 
Murray and Park Place in an attempt to find a helmet. 
At that point, the collapse of number 1 World Trade 
Center occurred and myself and a large group of police, 
firefighters, and some civilians took refuge in that 
area until the debris and dust cloud had settled. 

Following that, I exited the construction 
trailers, headed farther down North End Avenue 
attempting to locate personnel and ambulances. I came 
around to the park area along the River Terrace, at 
Chambers Street, and at that point I found 
approximately 3 ambulances. I believe one was a Lenox 
Hill bus and two EMTs or paramedics, who stated that 
they had shuttled the ambulances to that location. 
However, they weren't aware of where the crews for the 
trucks had gone or the location of any other 
personnel. 

At that point we attempted to -- I attempted 
to gather personnel at that location and through the 
park, I began to walk through the park to see if there 
were any personnel taking refuge in the park. I didn't 
find any. However, along the bulkhead of the park, 
there was numerous New York Waterway ferries, so we 
attempted to establish a transport center if necessary 



J. NEVINS 

with them to transport any patients to New Jersey if it 
became necessary. 

I was standing by at that location when the 
police then directed us to exit the park due to the 
fact that they believed there was a ruptured gas main 
underneath the park. I headed down Chambers Street to 
West Street, at which point I ran into EMT Richie 
Zarrillo from operations, Chief Hirth and his aide. 

At that point I asked Chief Hirth for 
direction. I was told that he was not sure what 
exactly -- whether we should head back toward the World 
Trade Center or head up to Chelsea Piers, where a 
casualty collection point had been set up. I had heard 
that previously on the radio, so I decided along with 
EMT Zarrillo that I would head up to Chelsea Piers. 

I started walking along West Street for 
numerous blocks until I was able to get a ride with a 
Hatzolah ambulance up to the staging location at 
Chelsea Piers, where I again became the secondary 
staging officer for Chelsea Piers. 

Q. Do you remember approximately what time that 
was by the time you got up to the pier? 

A. Probably half an hour to 45 minutes after the 
collapse of the second tower. 



J. NEVINS 

Q. When you came over to Vesey and West, prior 
to the first collapse, most of the vehicles there, the 
ambulances, were not Department ambulances? 

A. No, most of them were not Department 
ambulances. There were ambulances from Lenox Hill, 
there were Hatzolah volunteers, there were a few EMS 
ambulances. One of them was I believe 22 Henry, Staten 
Island HAZTAC ambulance. I remember that one 
specifically because they had requested they needed to 
bring their HAZTAC equipment with them. I believe 
there was a Metro Care ambulance that was -- 

There was vehicle 125 and -- unfortunately 
the list of all the units that were in staging were -- 
got lost in the ensuing. 

Q. Chaos? 

A. Chaos of the collapse. There were a few 
Chief's cars. I believe they were Fire Department, 
Chief's vehicles, unmarked vehicles, that were on Vesey 
Street off of West Avenue. There was a small upgrade 
across from American Express. They were parked along 
there next to the -- there is a parking lot there. 

Q. You were with Lieutenant Mann? 

A. Yes, Brad Mann. 

Q. He is from EMS? 



J. NEVINS 

A. Yes. Fire operations, EMS fire operations. 

Q. Did you see any other Department personnel 
when you got over to West and Vesey that you recognize 
their full name that you could place there? 

A. Not from FDNY, but there were -- actually, 
one of the FDNY people that was there was Gary Smiley, 
a paramedic, and his partner. I'm not sure who his 
partner was that day. I actually had seen him later at 
Chelsea Piers. He arrived with his ambulance and his 
partner. Chief Villani was in that area. Again his 
car was parked on Vesey between West and North End. 

One of the others, let's see, Raoul Perez, he 
is a paramedic for Lenox Hill, him and his partner were 
in the staging area. I can't think of anybody else 
that I definitely recognized. There was a Hatzolah 
crew. I believe they were the midtown Hatzolah. There 
were approximately 4 to 5 people in their ambulance. 
They just kept asking me if they needed to -- if I 
wanted to send them up towards the building. However, 
I told them to stay with their vehicle. 

Q. At that point were there any patients in the 
area? 

A. We were getting reports of patients in the 
foyer areas between 3 World Financial Center and 4 



J. NEVINS 

World Financial Center. However, I hadn't headed over 
to that area and none of the crews that were with me 
were reporting treating any patients. One ambulance 
did come through, I'm not sure whether it had picked up 
a patient, however, as they were heading out past the 
staged ambulances, we stopped them and they said they 
were transporting a burn patient. They were headed I 
believe to Cornell. I believe they left prior to the 
collapse. 

Q. When the first tower came down, from where 
you were, debris that was coming down, did it come down 
into the staging area here or -- 

A. No. 

Q. Can you remember? 

A. No, the only thing that affected us was dust 
and debris. I had actually been standing -- I was 
standing facing towards North End Avenue, so I was 
facing away from the building when there was a -- 
started a loud noise, I remember like a sound, like a 
cracking sound and Chief Villani ran past me and told 
me, John, run for your life. 

As I turned around it appeared to be the top 
of the tower was shifting. I just started running down 
towards North End. I didn't stop until I rounded the 



10 

J. NEVINS 



corner past the Embassy Suites hotel and at that point, 
there was a lot of dust and debris, tough to see back 
down. Couldn't see down Vesey Street to West Street, 
so I was unable to see where debris had landed. I 
began in the intersection attempting to get personnel 
to move ambulances and bring them farther up the street 
and around back onto North End Avenue. 

Also at that point, I'm not sure which -- 
there was an ambulance from the voluntary hospital 
treating one patient on a corner, I guess it's the 
southwest corner of North End and Vesey on the corner. 
There's an apartment complex across North End, by 4 
World Financial. There was a patient on the corner 
there and I directed one of the voluntary hospital 
units who had both crew members to treat the patient 
there. 

Again, what happened to that patient and 
where they went, I'm not really sure, due to the fact 
that they had loaded the patient into the ambulance, 
but we were directed to move farther away before they 
had given me any disposition on where they were going. 

Q. Right. Okay. You said the best you 
remember, Chief Villani arrived after the second plane 
had attacked, but prior to the collapses? 



11 

J. NEVINS 



A. Right. It was very close to the collapse of 
the first tower. Approximately 10, 15 minutes, because 
we hadn't even -- I hadn't given him the full report on 
the ambulances that were in the staging location and 
what resources were available and patients were being 
treated . 

Q. Any thoughts or comments on the situation? 

A. Not really. Very chaotic scene. I think we 
did the best we could given the situation and then, you 
know, the ensuing -- once the tower started to 
collapse, we were -- we did the best we could. 

Actually, one thing that just thinking about 
it now sticks in my mind. The MERV driver should be 
commended. He went back and -- I have a clear mental 
picture of the MERV with both ramps hanging out, going 
around the corner from Vesey on to North End. But the 
guy went back, definitely, probably the farthest down 
the block to save the MERV to get it out of there, get 
it away from the collapse. 

Q. The MERV was I assume from Bellevue? 

A. Yes, that was MERV 1 from Bellevue. 

Q. Is anything else you would like to add? 

A. I think that's it. 

MR. RADENBERG: Okay. Time is now 1445 



12 
J. NEVINS 



hours. The interview is concluded, 



File No. 9110108 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

EMT SAMUEL HARRIS 

Interview Date: October 17, 2001 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



S. HARRIS 2 

MR. FEILER: Today's date is October 
17th, 2001. The time now is 1025 hours. 
This is Monty Feiler of the Fire Department 
of the City of New York. I'm conducting an 
interview with the following individual. 

Please state your name, rank and 
assigned area. 

EMT HARRIS: My name is Samuel D. 
Harris. I'm an EMT. I work in the Bureau 
of Communications. 

MR. FEILER: Fire Department of the 
City of New York. We're conducting the 
interview at a conference room within 
investigations and trials, and the interview 
is regarding the events of September 11th, 
2001. 

Q. If you can go ahead, sir. 
A. I reported for work at 7 a.m. on 
September 11th. Most of the morning was pretty 
routine up until the first reports of the 
airliner hitting the World Trade Center. 

About that time I was getting some 
coffee. I noticed that people who were in 
operations, which is adjacent to communications, 



S. HARRIS 3 

were scrambling. I didn't know why. They were 
running into FOC I guess to -- at first thoughts 
I thought that somebody had went down ill in FOC 
the way people were running and moving. But then 
when I noticed that nobody was really calling for 
any ambulances or bus, I noticed it had to be 
something more. 

As I got more to my desk, I noticed 
people started talking about looking through the 
window, look out the window. At that point, 
still at my desk, curious as to what's going on, 
I was approached by Commissioner Gregory, who 
stated to Captain Pinkus that a plane had struck 
the twin towers. So that probably was around 
8:50, around that time. He then instructed me, 
Captain D'Amato and Captain Jace Pinkus, and we 
got into his vehicle and we headed toward 
Manhattan . 

Coming across the Brooklyn Bridge, you 
can see that the tower was just engulfed. Tower 
one was engulfed. As I got across the bridge and 
I got to West and Vesey, right at what is now 
considered ground zero -- I was literally right 
at the corner -- I then was instructed to move my 



S. HARRIS 4 

car, move the commissioner's car, further up 
Vesey toward North End Avenue. But I wasn't able 
to get up that far because police officers were 
cutting that block off. 

Q. You had originally stopped at West and 
Vesey? 

A. West and Vesey Streets. 

At that time I was still in contact 
with Captain Pinkus. I had lost sight of 
Commissioner Gregory and Captain D'Amato. As I 
went to park the car, they scrambled to whatever 
other areas they proceeded to. 

I met back up with Captain Pinkus, and 
we went back to West Street, where we met up with 
Chief Gombo, the assistant chief of EMS 
operations, and Lieutenant Ross Terranova. I was 
assigned to Lieutenant Terranova to kind of keep 
a record of what was going on. 

At that point Captain Pinkus was 
detailed to do something else with vehicle 
operations with staging. Chief Gombo, myself and 
Ross Terranova, we went into what was the 
operation command post at that time. It was in 
One World Trade Center in the foyer basement 



S. HARRIS 5 

area. 

At that time there were numerous people 
in there, people from the World Trade Center, 
people from OEM, people from all over, Port 
Authority, firemen, EMTs, the Fire commissioner, 
the first deputy, Commissioner Tierney. You 
couldn't count how many people that were probably 
just like right there in that foyer. 

I believe at that point after some 
preliminary instructions were made, I noticed 
that people were going upstairs. They were 
shutting down elevators and just trying to move 
people expeditiously out of the building. 
Sometime after that, maybe 20 minutes, I don't 
even think it was, I believe the decision was 
made that we should pull back to across the 
street . 

Without getting into great detail, it 
was very graphic some of the scenery that you saw 
just even walking into the building. But we made 
the decision -- they made the decision, I should 
say, to go across the street. As we did, we were 
on West, which would probably be the World 
Financial Center or American Express because 



S. HARRIS 6 

they're so closely together. 

Everybody was basically standing in the 
garage area. It has a two-door garage in this 
area at the corner. At that point everybody was 
making operations. Chief Gombo instructed me to 
go inside the building and contact Chief Diggs 
about point-to-point operations and 
communications so that they can have a whole line 
that was set up or dedicated that people can talk 
point to point without any interference. 

As I followed that direction, as I 
started to go into the building, I heard on the 
radio that what I was instructed to do was 
already done, primarily. You could hear it over 
the command frequency that it was already being 
done. But just to follow those orders that were 
given to me, I went ahead inside the building. I 
proceeded to make this phone call. 

As I got through to Chief Diggs, I 
believe I remember seeing Commissioner 
Fitzpatrick in there for a brief minute. I 
believe he walked out. At that point I spoke to 
Chief Diggs. I got direction from him. He gave 
me direction to relay back to Chief Gombo. 



S. HARRIS 7 

As I related back to Chief Gombo -- or 
I was getting ready to walk out and tell Chief 
Gombo what I was told, that's when tower one 
started to pancake and collapse. The only thing 
that I remember was the guy in front of me who 
was standing there in awe of just the earthquake 
feel, for myself as well. 

I had grabbed him because I didn't know 
if we were going to walk out of that building. 
The glass was shattering around us. We were in 
the big foyer. The building that we were in was 
primarily glass doored, and so was the area that 
you had to go in to use the phone, which was 
sectioned off. 

As I grabbed him and we ran back 
inside, some gentleman -- I believe he worked for 
the building. I don't recall his name. I 
believe this gentleman worked in the building, in 
that particular building. He was one of seven 
people that were in the building with me after 
One started to crumble. 

As we ran down the foyer or down the 
hallway, at that point it was so dark and so 
thick and the lights went right away that you 



S. HARRIS 8 

couldn't even see your hand before your face. As 
you turn back to just look down the corridor, you 
couldn't even see the corridor that you just ran 
down. That's how dark it was. That's how eerie 
it was. That's how very scared I believe of us 
were keep down. But we all kept cool heads. We 
all stayed together. We were looking for another 
exit, and there weren't any. 

Q. Who was in that group with you? 

A. Now with me there was a paramedic. I 
believe I learned his last -- what's the name? 
Glenn. He was in there with me. There were two 
New York City detectives in there with me and the 
building manager for that building, and the rest 
were just office workers. There were no other 
people left . 

The two detectives basically -- we 
coordinated and I was trying to tell them that 
the building came down. He thought I was being 
kind of nervous. I told him, yes, I am, but I'm 
not all that nervous. I just wanted to make sure 
that we were all alive, that that big building 
was not going to cave in on this little building 
and we were going to get crushed, because who 



S. HARRIS 9 

knew. 

After we made several attempts to look 
for other exits out of the building outside of 
the front door, there were no other exits. What 
we did was the building manager took us into what 
seemed like a computer room or a security room, 
and he found some flashlights. 

The decision was made for us to wait 
for a period of time, probably I'd say we waited 
a whole hour, maybe more before we could even see 
anything. There was that much dust and smoke, 
and you couldn't really breathe. 

So we waited until some of the dust 
settled, and then we all -- two people would go 
ahead and check to see if we can go out the front 
door. If there was no access way from the front 
door, we would wait until somebody came and 
eventually got us. But we would all stay 
together . 

So what we did was we formed a line. 
We grabbed each other's belts, and we shined the 
flashlights. We didn't go up to a certain point, 
and the two men went ahead. They noticed that 
there was an exit way for us to get out. Thank 



S. HARRIS 10 

God. 

After we came out -- 
Q. Where did you come out of? 
A. I came right out the front door that I 
went in, which is probably the World Financial 
building, World Financial Center building, 
because this would be the garage area right here. 
In the first rehaps I believed it was the 
American Express building, only because it was so 
closely related. 

After we came out of the building, I 
immediately went to the garage area. The garage 
area where there were hundreds of people standing 
there when I left to make this phone call, there 
was about 25 firemen. 

At that point I ran into Chief 
Kowalczyk's aide, and I was asking him where was 
his boss. He said he didn't know, and he had no 
clue as to where he was. He was with Chief Gombo 
and several of the others before I walked into 
the building to make the phone call. 

Outside of that, the field comm. truck, 
the van truck was crushed. The guard shack that 
stands between the two doors in the garage was 



S. HARRIS 11 

crushed. It looked almost like the two garage 
doors were blown open. Debris was everywhere: 
metal, paper, dust. 

At that point after staying there for 
I'd say 20 minutes trying to find somebody I 
know, I ran into Captain Sickles, Howard Sickles, 
and I noticed that he was standing toward the 
curb or what would have been the curb. He was 
trying to give a progress report. 

I was trying to persuade him to let's 
move out, to let's get out of this area, for fear 
of whatever is going to happen again. 

Q. Where was that located? 

A. That was at the beginning of this 
building at probably West Street. So we're 
facing West at this point. 

Q. On Vesey? 

A. I'm sorry, Vesey. We're facing Vesey 
at this point. He's at the corner, and I'm 
trying to get him to let's go up Vesey toward 
North End. Let's go further up to get away from 
the aftermath. 

At that point as I was trying to 
persuade him, I did see at that point Chief 



S. HARRIS 12 

Ganci. Chief Ganci was trying to rally some of 
the firefighters that were in the area to also 
move up toward North End, to move out of the 
area. 

As he was doing that, I was still 
trying to persuade Captain Sickles to give the 12 
and make it brief but let's go. He continued on 
the radio to the point where I just grabbed him 
by the arm and was pulling him, let's go, let's 
get out of here. 

There was a firefighter at the corner 
of Vesey and North End when we walked up to North 
End, and he said that this was really bad. I 
said, "Yes, it is. How could something like this 
happen." I said, "Well, listen, what we should 
do is move because the north tower is on fire 
still. I said, "We don't know if this one is 
going to come down, so let's move out of the 
area. " 

At that point police officers and other 
people were trying to move people up North End 
Avenue to get them away from -- or more so up 
Vesey toward North End. 

At that point as I was walking up, I 



S. HARRIS 13 

approached where the commissioner's car was, and 
that's when you heard the rumble again and the 
other tower started to come down. At that point 
my thought was to try to move the commissioner's 
car, and right behind me unbeknownst to me was 
Lieutenant Ross Terranova, who told me, "Forget 
it. Just go. Let's go," and we all started 
running, with Captain Sickles behind us. 

We ran into North End Avenue, and right 
in the back of North End Avenue at the corner off 
to the right was where the MERV was. There's a 
building of some sort there like a hotel or like 
a coffee shop right on the corner where the MERV 
was parked. We all ran inside there. 

At that point right behind us about 20 
people -- two police officers were badly hurt. 
They probably got hit with some type of rubble, 
and they rushed them up that way. There were a 
few civilians. The LSU unit was there, and me 
and a couple other EMTs just started trying to 
bandage who was there and treat who was there. 

At that point I was reunited with 
Captain Pinkus again at that point and some of 
the other EMS chiefs: Chief Basile, Chief 



S. HARRIS 14 

Carrasquillo, Chief Gombo, at that point -- I did 
see him for a brief minute -- Chief Pascale. 

At that point after that area was made 
for a treatment area for people who were coming 
in, everybody was being taken care of. Everybody 
was given water to flush their eyes and to give 
them some sort of first aid, some sort of 
comfort, given what they just went through. 

At that point about an hour or so, hour 
and a half after that, me, Captain Pinkus and 
Chief Pascale proceeded to go to Chelsea Pier, 
where we stayed basically for the rest of the 
duration of the evening into the morning. 

Q. Were you aware that a second plane had 
hit one of the towers? 

A. Yes. I believe the second plane hit 
just shortly after probably coming off the 
Brooklyn Bridge. I didn't really realize it 
until after, because I believe you felt like the 
bridge shift as I was coming over, and I never 
felt it that way. You didn't realize it. My 
whole modem was just to get across this bridge, 
get to West and Vesey. 

Q. What frequency were you utilizing? 



S. HARRIS 15 

A. At the time I was on the command 
frequency. 

Q. EMS command? 

A. Yes. 

Q. And were you given any specific 
locations where to go to; do you recall? 

A. No, not until -- no, because when I got 
to Lieutenant Terranova, basically they were 
still in the process of setting up staging areas. 
I believe that the staging area switched quite a 
few times in the time that I was with him before 
one had collapsed. 

So the decision was trying to put 
people in areas of safety but the greater number 
of where we can get the most resources available 
without anybody. 

Q. You said you had seen Chief Kowalczyk's 
aide. Do you know who that was? 

A. I don't know his name offhand. I know 
him by face. I didn't know his name. 

Q. Was there any other EMS people that you 
saw, firefighters, chiefs, anybody that you 
recognized? 

A. Not so much out of the firefighters. 



S. HARRIS 16 

But like the paramedic, I didn't know him until 
afterwards. We talked later. 
Q. What was his name? 
A. Glenn, Mike Glenn. 

Basically it was Chief Gombo, Chief 
Basile, Chief Pascale, Chief Hannafey, Chief 
Carrasquillo, Chief Scibelli, I saw later in the 
evening. But most of those -- Alan Cruz on the 
ALS unit from Manhattan. The MERV driver I knew 
from 13. I didn't really know his name, but I 
recall him being. Sedley, Sedley was another LSU 
driver from Brooklyn. He was there. I remember 
seeing him. 

There was just so many people. Linda 
McCarthy from EMD. She was there. There was 
just so many people that I crossed paths with, 
but then as you're trying to focus on just the 
task at hand, I was just -- basically coming out 
of the building after the first collapse, I was 
nervous for everybody that was standing out there 
because if it wasn't for Chief Gombo, I mean, I 
would have been out there too instead of inside. 

I don't know. I really don't know, if 
Chief Gombo would have not sent me in that 



S. HARRIS 17 

building, I thought we would have been amongst 
them. I'm glad and relieved to see that he 
wasn't hurt or injured during the aftermath. 

I lost sight of Commissioner Gregory. 
I didn't see him. I didn't hear of him until 
like at least the next day. Also Captain 
D'Amato, I didn't hear his whereabouts or how he 
was . 

Once I got to Chelsea Pier, Chief 
Pascale assigned me with Captain Boyle, Jack 
Boyle, and I was assigned with him for a good 
many hours. We stayed a good 12, maybe 13 hours 
together, driving people back and forth, the 
doctors, setting up the doctors and the triage 
and the temporary morgue that was all down at 
Chelsea Pier. 

I was able to focus on the task 
basically that was given to me. It was just hard 
to forget. Every few minutes you thought about 
somebody you knew back there that you didn't hear 
was okay. Chief McCracken, for that matter, for 
a long time, until I got to see him later on in 
the night. 

I didn't hear the passing of the first 



S. HARRIS 18 

deputy commissioner until later on, and also 
Chief Ganci, who I had just saw at that building. 
I believe once I started to make my move up Vesey 
more toward North End Avenue, I believe they made 
probably the decision to see what was going to 
happen in tower two. 

It was my thought that that's where 
they were fatally taken away from us at that 
point, that maybe they went down to building two, 
which is probable because I didn't see them after 
that. 

Q. Is there anything else you would like 
to before we conclude? 

A. No, without really getting into some of 
the graphical details, that was pretty much as 
accurately as I can come to say what happened. 

Q. Thank you very much for participating 
in the interview. 

A. You ' re welcome. 

MR. FEILER: The time now is 1052 

hours, and this concludes the interview. 



File No. 9110112 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

EMT JOHN ROTHMUND 

Interview Date: October 18, 2001 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



J. ROTHMUND 2 

MR. RADENBERG: Today is October 17th, 
2001. I'm Paul Radenberg of the Fire 
Department, City of New York. The time is 
now 1655 hours. I'm conducting an interview 
with -- 

EMT ROTHMUND: JOHN ROTHMUND, EMT, 
Battalion 22. 

MR. RADENBERG: This interview is being 
conducted at EMS Battalion 22 regarding the 
events of September 11th, 2001. 
Q. All yours, John. 

A. Okay. I was working 22 Adam with John 
Heer, my partner. We got assigned a job along 
with I believe five other units at the time. 
They told us to respond to the foot of the 
Verrazano Bridge and stand by. So we went. We 
were 63. 

By the time we got to the foot of the 
VZ, they had already called us through to the 
Brooklyn side of the VZ and stand by. Not a 
clue, never got a job, never heard anything. We 
really didn't know what was going on. 

We go over the bridge. As we get over 
the bridge, we look to our left and we can see 



J. ROTHMUND 3 

one of the towers was burning. So we had an idea 
what was going on. We got about to the foot of 
the Verrazano Bridge, and they called us again 
and told us to take it to the Brooklyn side of 
the Battery Tunnel and stand by. 

Once we got onto the Gowanus and over 
that bridge, there was a chain of emergency 
vehicles. We just kept going. We got to the 
foot of the tunnel. There was no way to turn 
off, no way to go, so you had to keep going. 

We went into Manhattan, came out 
through the tunnel. We wound up going up West up 
until I think it was Liberty, and staging was set 
at Liberty and West, right in that -- it could 
have been here (indicating), over there. 

At the time we had no idea what was 
going on. The only thing we knew, there was a 
fire, and we knew that from looking over off the 
bridge that a plane had hit it, but we thought it 
was a Cessna, like a little tiny private 
airplane. Nobody had a clue it was a commercial 
liner . 

Q. Right. 

A. So we set up staging at that area, 



J. ROTHMUND * 

Liberty and West, and my partner and I got out. 
We were one of the first three at that location, 
ambulances. We got out. Saw how close we were 
in relation to the towers, we also saw that both 
towers were in flames. We didn't know what was 
going on there either. 

We decided to go see who we could talk 
to. We relocated the staging. We felt that it 
was totally unsafe where we were. So me and my 
partner tried to find authority figures, and 
there was really none around. The only person 
that seemed to have any kind of sense of why the 
staging was there was a voluntary unit. 

We figured, you know what, we're just 
going to relocate them. We relocated from 
Liberty and West down to South End. We started 
to line ambulances from South End up until 
Liberty. So you came from South End and Albany. 
I imagine it was Albany. Right now I can't 
remember. From the map that's what it looks 
like. 

Q. Okay. 

A. I don't know, there had to be 20, 30 
ambulances there that we moved. We felt it was 



J. ROTHMUND 5 

unsafe where we were. 
Q. Right. 

A. A long story short, we get all our 
stuff out, our equipment out, and we stand by. 
We were just waiting. We received one patient 
which had a head injury, laceration, who we gave 
to the voluntary Hazollah unit, because they 
already had a previous patient and they were 
going to go 82 to the hospital. So we put them 
with them so we don't lose another bus. 

At this time we saw people jumping from 
the roof, so we kind of realized the gravity of 
everything. We really just thought it was a bad 
fire. We really didn't know what the hell was 
going on. We saw so many people jumping. We 
just waited. 

We had walked up with equipment and 
whatnot from this location and up until Liberty, 
and we were standing by on Liberty just trying to 
see what was going on. Again, there was really 
no authority figures whatsoever. 

At that time we were looking at the top 
of the towers and all the rubble and people 
coming off, and all of a sudden you heard -- it 



J. ROTHMUND 6 

sounded like another airplane, or a missile. It 
was like a slow shake. The whole ground just 
vibrated and shook. We just told everybody to 
run, run into a building, let's go, run, run, 
run. 

We ran off of Liberty. We couldn't get 
very far. We got into a superette. We threw as 
many people as were coming into this superette, 
me and my partner. We never left each other's 
side the whole entire time. We were like Velcro. 
We got everybody into the deli superette. I 
don't know what the hell it was. It was big. It 
was good size. 

After that the debris was just coming 
down and coming down. Nobody could really stand 
there anymore. There was nobody else coming in, 
so we went in. We got inside. Again, we're the 
only kind of emergency service people that were 
in there. We were just as scared and nervous as 
everybody else. We just couldn't panic. 

We had about 40 people in this deli 
that we had to try and keep calm for a while. 
For the longest time we thought we were pinned 
in. We thought the rubble was in front. It was 



J. ROTHMUND 7 

rubble in front of the deli, in front of the 
windows. Whatever debris can be. We really 
didn't know. We just saw dark smoke. 

One guy fainted in the back, some Parks 
Department person, green uniform, gold shield. 
We roused him. He woke up. At that time after 
trying to keep everybody in the back of the store 
and calm, we tried to find an alternate exit. 

As we were trying to find an exit, 
somebody came down from the buildings up top; I 
don't know how many floors. I know we walked 
three floors. Anyway, we tried to find it, and 
they said there's women and children up top in 
the building that are stuck. They can't breathe, 
there's smoke, there's so much smoke nobody could 
breathe. 

So me and my partner grabbed a couple 
wet towels, ran upstairs, pulled out probably 
upwards of 10 to 20 people, women, children, 
pregnant women, pets, whatever the hell was up 
there, and we brought them all down into the 
store, because we had seen a back door. 

The back door was just as much filled 
with soot and smoke, but it was a way out. So we 



J. ROTHMUND 8 

figured we would keep everybody in here protected 
for a while. We brought everybody down. We just 
sat there and waited for a minute or two we saw 
that the front was clearing up. Everybody 
remained in side for a little while. 

We went outside, and you could see your 
hand in front of your face. That's how much it 
had cleared up. So we decided we've got to go 
and see what's going on. So we told everybody 
stay inside for a few minutes and let the dust 
settle. We had no patients. Everybody was 
relatively shook up, whatnot, but for the most 
part everybody was all right. 

We went outside. It was just like 
horrible. It was like a war. There was just 
nothing but soot and concrete chunks and whatever 
everywhere. Ambulances were covered in soot, 
doors wide open. There was nothing you could do. 
Everything was just a foot of soot and dirt, 
whatever you want to call it. 

We came out of the deli, and we see 
Chief Grant. We see him walk by. He was kind of 
dazed a little bit altered, a little AMS there. 
We went up to him to actually look for some kind 



J. ROTHMUND 9 

of -- to find out where we were going, what the 
situation was. He became more of a patient than 
anything. We made him our priority at the time 
because nobody else was there anyway. We put him 
back in the deli. 

We told everybody it's clearing up, to 
head to the water, come around, go down toward 
the esplanade. We treated him, gave him oxygen, 
flushed his eyes, gave water, whatever, tried to 
hook him up. He was a little bit shocked, is 
really what it came down to. 

We treated him for a few minutes. A 
few minutes -- time had no concept whatsoever, 
really no concept. It could have been 15 
minutes; it could have been 5 seconds. I have no 
clue. We took care of him. 

We wound up having another patient 
outside with minor bumps and bruises. We went to 
check on him with my partner. We never left each 
other. When I say "me," I mean "we"; okay? 
Q. Right. 

A. We went to check on this person. We 
turned around and Chief Grant was walking out of 
the building, heading right to the water. We 



J. ROTHMUND 10 

figured, you know what, he's going in a good 
direction, let him go. We're going to watch him 
walk down and that's it. 

That was the only place that had any 
kind of air was down next to the water. 

Q. Right. 

A. So we sent as many people as we could 
down towards the water if they're able to walk. 
We did have a few fractures and whatnot. 
Splinted like lightning, you know what I mean, 
got them out of there. 

Then we got into the ambulance, threw 
the stretcher back in the ambulance, because it 
was still running, and we figured the other 
tower's got to be coming down. So we took the 
ambulance and we moved the ambulance away down to 
the esplanade. Where we figured it would be kind 
of safe. 

Q. Right. 

A. As we were going down I think it was 
Albany, I imagine. I'm really not sure. As we 
were going down Albany, I saw a captain. Oh, and 
at the time, after Grant had walked down towards 
the water, Chief McCracken came walking down and 



J. ROTHMUND 11 

walked back up. I couldn't catch the man. I 
don't know where he went. He disappeared into 
the smoke. I couldn't catch up to him no matter 
how much I tried. So we figured we're alone 
here, you know. 

As we were pulling down, we saw some 
captain. I really don't know who the gentleman 
was -- heavyset guy, black hair, it appeared to 
be, white helmet, blue shirt and the bars, you 
know -- asking us for a ride. I'm not going 
anywhere, I'm telling him. We're going down to 
the corner here, you know. 

I guess shock kind of took over him 
too, kind of getting emotional and whatnot. So 
we stopped and we let him into to the empty seat 
that we were going to drive, took him down. 

The inside of the ambulance was in no 
better shape than the outside air was. But we 
brought him down to there, told him here, get 
out, parked the truck, turned the battery off, 
whatever, got another patient. 

So I walked him back up again and got 
another patient. When I say "patients," minor: 
bruises, cuts and scratches, fractures that, go 



J. ROTHMUND 12 

ahead, keep walking. Fix you up quick and go. 

As we made our way back into it again 
trying to get -- to help, the other tower came 
down. We couldn't see anything, the smoke was 
just -- we couldn't -- the stuff, soot. 

Q. Where were you when the second tower 
came down? 

A. The second tower came down -- 

Q. Still back down in this area? 

A. No. We were probably up on South End 
or you know what, it might have been more on 
West. Yeah, it had to be on West, because we had 
moved the bus down and we had started walking 
north to get -- to help. That's what you assumed 
happened was the towers came down. 

Q. Right. 

A. We didn't know whether it came down or 
not. We really thought it was another plane 
hitting, but we figured if it was it was 
devastating, whatever it was. 

After we got the bus to safety, because 
that was our only egress out of there was that 
bus. 

Q. Right. 



J. ROTHMUND 13 

A. We treated another one, sent him on his 
way and went back up. Like I said, did a couple 
fractures -- what I'm guessing is Albany to west 
side. I'm really not sure. 

We went up toward midtown, and we went 
left on either South End or West. Right before 
we got anywhere near the towers, the other one -- 
you couldn't see the towers. You looked up and 
you couldn't see what was there or not. There 
was nothing but smoke. 

All of a sudden it happened again, the 
same exact sound, the same thing. 

Q. The noise and the vibrations? 

A. The noise and the vibrations. 

At that point everything -- it just 
came down. All you saw was the cloud of smoke 
coming at you, so we ran. No shame. We ran -- 

Q. None at all. 

A. -- right down Albany again to the 
esplanade. We escorted hundreds, hundreds of 
people down the esplanade, walked down to -- I 
have no idea where it was. We got to a point in 
the esplanade that seemed like it had a dock on 
it of some sort. A fireman or police officer -- 



J. ROTHMUND 14 

I was with maybe a handful of firemen, maybe two 
or three police officers. 

As I got down and escorted people out, 
we were trying to keep away from the smoke. We 
only had the respirators, which was after the 
second tower came down anyway. 

Q. Right. 

A. We just inhaled that air. And the air 
was nice over here. If you stayed on the bottom, 
stayed down on the ground and sucked a little 
air, you got a clear breath. 

Q. Right. 

A. Pulled all kinds of people down. 
Again, we didn't know what was going on. We 
thought it was a bomb, you know, like planes were 
dropping from the sky or missiles were hitting. 
We didn't know what the hell was going on. 

So a police officer took out a Chinese 
restaurant door, knocked it in. Whatever the 
case may be, he got in. We started lifting 
people up into this restaurant, the women, the 
kids, anybody, elderly people. We had to lift 
them over some kind of railing, because it was 
the easiest access from the esplanade to get them 



J. ROTHMUND 15 

in and out, because, again, it was just like a 
war zone. You didn't know what the hell was 
happening. 

So we got as many people as we could 
that came walking along that esplanade into that 
building and kept them there. At that time I 
believe Mark Harris -- I saw Mark Harris and 
Kathy Zarr. They came over, and as they started 
to make up the triage area with zero equipment. 
We had nothing. Just maybe a supportive thing 
for themselves or for the patients. We really 
had nothing to do anything with. 

The boats started coming in on the 
corner over the water. We started pulling out 
the women and children from where we put them in 
not 20 minutes before or however long before. We 
started pulling them back out, put them on boats 
to get them over to New Jersey. I don't know how 
long we did that for. Again, treatment for minor 
things along the way, nothing to speak of. We 
pulled them all out. 

We didn't like the idea of having a 
triage here because we had nothing. We decided 
we've got to walk and find somebody else, some 



J. ROTHMUND 16 

kind of brass. 

Q. Right? 

A. After this whole place was evacuated, 
there was nobody left on this esplanade, me and 
my partner took off walking down -- I don't see 
it on the map. I really wouldn't know where to 
begin what the name of the street would be. 

Q. Let me see if I have another map. I 
don't know if that's going to be any better. 

A. Not a bad map. We were right here. 
This would be -- 

Q. South Cove Park? 

A. Right. This is where we were. South 
Cove Park is where we were putting people on 
boats and where we had put the people into that 
restaurant, keeping them safe and out of the 
fumes, the smoke. 

After we got everybody off of that 
esplanade and out of that restaurant, women and 
children, onto these boats, we had no patients. 
It was just mostly men who were totally capable 
of handling themselves. 

Q. Right. 

A. Police officers there, firemen, still 



J. ROTHMUND 17 

remained there. Like I said, we had no brass. 
We had no equipment to set up a triage spot. So 
we started to walk down along the esplanade down 
South Cove Park. As we were about to turn the 
corner, we saw another EMS guy. I don't know who 
he was. He said they set up a triage point, a 
staging point, at South Ferry and they also set 
one up at Chelsea Pier. 

So in relation to where we were at the 
time, we felt that the south ferry was a lot 
closer. So before we walked any further, we 
decided we've got to go back and see what we 
could do. We turn around, went back up. As we 
went back up, everybody was just coming back 
down. I mean, firemen, cops, everybody, just 
coming back away from there. Nobody was saying 
much of anything, just like don't go there, just 
leave, don't go in there. 

So we went back up to where we had 
parked our ambulance on Albany and the esplanade, 
went to get back into the ambulance, and the 
windows were all gone. All the windows were 
blown out in the back. We tried to get in to 
start it. There was an amazing cloud of soot in 



J. ROTHMUND 18 

there. The soot was on the seats like six inches 
deep. We jumped in to try to get it started, and 
she was dead. 

So we then walked the whole esplanade 
down to I guess maybe First Avenue, First Place, 
still on the esplanade, though, to where we found 
a chief. I don't know who the man was. Nicest 
guy in the world. 

Q. EMS chief? 

A. EMS chief. EMS chief. I don't know 
who he was. He didn't want to hear anything but 
how we were. I guess we looked pretty horrible 
at the time. He asked us if we needed treatment, 
whatnot. We said we needed a little rest, a 
little water, wipe our eyes out of the soot. 

He said he was setting up a small 
staging spot with just one ambulance. He had 
equipment, had oxygen. He didn't have an oxygen 
regulator. It just so happened I had my own 
personal regulator on me that I didn't want to 
leave in the ambulance and I took, which I never 
saw again. It was gone. I gave him the oxygen. 

Again, we set up a treatment area right 
at that area. I don't know at all where that 



J. ROTHMUND 19 

would be except for maybe First and esplanade if 
that even exists. Needless to say, we sat there 
for an hour or so. Again, time really is hard. 

Q. Right. 

A. Evacuating people off of Manhattan onto 
boats with the Fire Department and Police 
Department. We treated whomever needed to be 
treated in the ambulance that was there. There 
was about maybe five or six other techs there, 
and I imagine the chief stayed. I don't know who 
it would be. 

We didn't do much treatment after that 
point because we were pretty shot. He was just 
letting us sit for a few minutes, cooling off, 
whatever. If I had to guess, I would say this 
was about 1:00 now, maybe 2:00. This was late. 
We were there for a good piece of time. We 
didn't get down to this ferry until maybe 2, 
3:00, something like that. 

Q. Okay. 

A. I'm really not sure. But he had told 
us that this area was a safe area. He had heard 
something about the ferry being set up as a 
triage point, but he wasn't sure. He said as 



J. ROTHMUND 20 

soon as he gets more information he'll move us if 
he needs to. But as it was, we were in a safe 
area. We had a steady flow of people who were 
potential patients. So we remained there for a 
good piece of time. I don't know how long. 

After most of the patients evacuated 
off the island already in the boats -- and there 
were numerous amounts of boats along the 
promenade, just pulling people on. You throw 
them on. 

Q. Right. 

A. We all picked up and walked. I guess 
the esplanade goes around lower Manhattan. So we 
walked along the water across a park -- I don't 
know where the park is; here you go, Robert F. 
Wagner Park -- down to the ferry. 

We got to the terminal, and it was like 
a godsend, because everybody's in there. All the 
triage stuff was set up. 

That was it. We remained there. Not 
many people to treat at that time. Everybody was 
off the island. Anybody that was walking and 
able to treat was treated and sent off that 
island already, whether it be on a boat along the 



J. ROTHMUND 21 

promenade or underneath the ferry or Chelsea 
Pier, whoever walked over there. We didn't have 
anybody really that I can say was serious. 
Everybody was gone. They got up and left. 

At that point we stayed there until 
12:00 that night, maybe, 12:30 that night. I 
jumped on the ferry and came back to the island. 
I didn't have a ride once I got to the island. 
We had to take a train to Eltingville. We sat on 
the corner of Eltingville waiting for a 
lieutenant to come pick us up, which there was 
none of. 

We wound up getting a ride from some 
hell of a nice guy that just pulled over and 
drove us back to the station. So that was the 
tie-in to the fitting night. 

I don't know what else to say. 

Q. When you first came into Manhattan 
through the battery, you came up the West Side 
Highway coming up there? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Do you remember who else was with you 
when you got up to West and Liberty up there? 

A. No. As far as units? 



J. ROTHMUND 22 

Q. Not necessarily the unit numbers. 

A. I know a couple of the guys, but I'm 
new out here too. So I don't know them by name 
or anything. 

Q. They were from -- 

A. No, they weren't from EMS. They were 
from Staten Island, yes. One was a Staten Island 
unit which pulled up -- I don't know, I'd have to 
say a few minutes, four minutes after I did, 
maybe. 

Q. Volunteer units? 

A. Yeah, volunteer. 

Q. Staten Island Hospital? 

A. Yeah, Staten Island Hospital. 

One guy's name was Mitch who was over 
there. Then I saw a Vinnie's unit. These are 
ones that I took note of because I knew the guys. 

Q. Right. 

A. There was a few Hazollah . There was a 
couple of Richmond County. I saw some Metro 
people. 

Again, when I pulled up it seemed they 
had this triage spot where the ambulances were 
sitting, awaiting patients. There was, I have to 



J. ROTHMUND 23 

say, a bravo ambulance, if I'm not mistaken. I 
don't really know for sure. None of them were 
EMS. None of these ambulances were EMS who set 
up this staging point. That's why we changed it. 
We said, you know what, this is not a spot for us 
to be in, so we moved it around. 

Q. Okay. 

A. That's all I remember. Nobody stopped 
there anymore. Everybody just turned around and 
came down the street. They didn't think twice 
about it. 

That was it. I saw no brass. I saw no 
brass. 

Q. On Liberty? You didn't come across any 
supervisors? 

A. No. There was, I imagine it was a 
lieutenant, whether it was EMS or the Fire 
Department. I saw numerous PD who instructed me 
where to go, and the lieutenant instructed me 
where to go. I couldn't tell you who he was. If 
you paid me a million dollars, I wouldn't know. 

There was umpteen brass all over here, 
but we hadn't gotten that far yet. After we 
relocated our ambulances, we got up to Liberty 



J. ROTHMUND 24 

and started walking in, and it happened. 
Everything came down. We didn't know where, 
what. We just took cover, basically. 

It was west side to Liberty. We 
relocated from Liberty to South End and Albany. 

Q. Okay. Any thoughts or comments? 

A. No. I'm glad I made it out of there; 
sorry for the people that didn't. I wish we 
could have done more, but there was nothing we 
could do. 

Q. I thank you. 

MR. RADENBERG: The time is now 1722. 

The interview is concluded. 



File No. 9110115 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

PARAMEDIC WILLIAM SIMON 

Interview Date: October 18, 2001 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



W. SIMON 2 

MR. RADENBERG: Today is October 19th, 
2001. I'm Paul Radenberg of the Fire 
Department of the City of New York. The 
time now is 1617 hours. I'm conducting an 
interview with - - 

PARAMEDIC SIMON: WILLIAM SIMON. I'm a 
paramedic with the New York City Fire 
Department, Battalion 58, Brooklyn. 

MR. RADENBERG: We're conducting the 
interview at EMS Battalion 58 concerning the 
events of the morning of September 11th, 
2001. 

Q. Bill, if you would start from when you 
were assigned to the job. 

A. All right. It was a pretty routine 
day. We came on and we checked the truck and we 
figured we're going to be on our normal everyday 
routine assignments. When we're in Canarsie, not 
too far from the station, following our check out 
our vehicle, we heard a report of the Trade 
Center being struck. 

At that point we proceeded closer to 
our 1089, because we knew that we would in all 
probability have to be utilized. We subsequently 



W. SIMON 3 

were assigned to the city for a diff. breather at 
Broome and Broadway. That was, I would say, 
about 9:50. 

We knew at that point that tower one 
had been struck and was on fire. We couldn't 
believe the reports. My first impression was 
that it probably was a terrorist act. I don't 
think the second building had been hit at that 
point. It was a bright, clear, sunny day, and my 
impression is any pilot, any novice pilot, tries 
to do everything in their power to avoid striking 
a high-rise building of that height. 

At any rate, we were assigned to Broome 
and Broadway for a single individual having 
trouble breathing, which I thought was somewhat 
unusual because there should be hundreds of 
people related to that event having trouble 
breathing. 

My partner, Barry Hirsch, was driving. 
We arrived in the city I would say maybe 10 to 12 
minutes after we were assigned. I was basically 
doing the navigating for Barry so that we 
wouldn't make any misturns and would take the 
most expeditious route. 



W. SIMON 4 

We came across Delancy Street -- first 
of all we came into Manhattan through Brooklyn 
over the Manhattan Bridge, came off of the 
Manhattan Bridge and responded, took a few turns 
and got over to Allen Street, Allen Street to 
Delancy, and then we started to travel west on 
Delancy. Then we crossed Bowery and then 
Lafayette and we dropped down to Broome Street, 
Broome and Broadway. 

We were both awestruck by the scenes 
that we saw of the dust and the debris cloud that 
we could see as we were entering the city. I 
believe by the time we got there, I think the 
second tower had been hit. That also was an 
awesome sight. 

We got to Broadway, and there's a 
tremendous amount of dust, pulverized masonry on 
the ground, office materials, papers, computer 
files and probably 10,000 people walking north on 
Broadway in various states of - - I wouldn't say 
people were panicking, but they were walking 
briskly to get away, hastily. 

Some people were wearing makeshift 
masks from scarves of their own clothing. Some 



W. SIMON 5 

had obtained filtration masks, which we utilize 
on the ambulances, probably from some of the EMS 
crews that they had encountered. 

What amazed me was that we were 
approximately 18 to 20 blocks from the World 
Trade Center plaza and the amount of dust that 
was on the street was anywhere from maybe a half 
inch to an inch, all over the cars, all over the 
street. The amount of paper looked like there 
had been a ticker tape parade on Broadway. 

Also it reminded me of the descriptions 
of what a nuclear winter would look like after a 
nuclear attack or something out of what had 
happened at Hiroshima. 

After we arrived at the scene in this 
maze of people that were walking past us, we 
parked the vehicle. We said there must be 
somebody out here who's having trouble breathing. 
So we exited the vehicle. We approached one of 
the police officers that were one of the officers 
directing traffic at the intersection. We asked 
her did anybody approach her about having trouble 
breathing. She said no, there's been hundreds of 
people that went past her, and nobody approached 



W. SIMON 6 

her specifically. 

We felt it would be appropriate to exit 
the vehicle and try to canvas those storefronts 
that were still open, because there were still 
some merchants that had their doorways open and 
were looking south at the event as this mass of 
people were walking past us. 

So I went south of Broome Street and 
canvassed on the east and west side of the 
street, and my partner went north. We canvassed 
east and west, on the east and west sides of the 
street, to all the store owners and as many 
people as we could encounter. Amazingly nobody 
was complaining of trouble breathing. 

We actually wanted to get a patient, 
because we wanted to get involved in the actual 
rescue at that point. We figured some of these 
people had to be in distress, but I think their 
primary focus was escape and to get to their 
loved ones and just to let their family members 
know that they were all right. They really 
didn't want to, unless it was absolutely 
necessary. 

We even saw some people with minor 



W. SIMON 7 

cuts, and they -- 

Q. Didn't want treatment? 
A. Yeah, didn't want treatment. They 
said, "No, I 'm fine. " 

So at that point we got back on the 
radio and we told the dispatcher our current 
location and our status and that at this point we 
had no patients or nobody that was requiring 
assistance. 

We knew at that point we were probably 
going to be dispatched either to One World Trade 
Center Plaza or one of the other staging areas, 
and we subsequently were. We were instructed to 
respond to Chambers and West Street. That was 
the new staging area following the collapse of 
tower one. Units were being deployed over there. 

It took us about five minutes to get 
over there, moving through the mass of people and 
vehicles and emergency rescue vehicles. The 
first EMS officer that we encountered were 
Lieutenant Fitton and Lieutenant Pinkus, who were 
on West Street. They were coordinating the 
reassignment of EMS units on the west side. 

We identified ourselves. They're 



W. SIMON 8 

colleagues of ours, and they acknowledged our 
presence and were glad to see us. We were glad 
to see them, somebody to give us some direction. 

We parked our vehicle in the now 
redeployed staging area and got a quick briefing 
on the events that had transpired. There were 
still a lot of questions to be answered about the 
magnitude and what rescue efforts were actually 
going on and the conflicting stories about our 
people involved and how many firefighters and 
police officers were injured. All we know is 
this a horrendous event of amazing magnitude. I 
looked south, and I was mesmerized by what I saw. 
It was like something out of a movie except we're 
in it . 

They asked us to park our vehicle and 
to walk south on West Street and to render any 
care to any people who were ambulatory or 
confused about where to seek treatment and to 
instruct them where the new staging area was. 

Also any EMS units that might be 
disoriented or confused about where the staging 
was, because our communications -- the tactical 
frequencies were so busy that there was a lot of 



W. SIMON 9 

miscommunication going on at that point. I think 
we were not only rescuers at that point but we 
were a way of communicating to the other units 
where to regroup. 

My partner and I started to walk south 
down West Street and tried to answer as quickly 
as we could the questions of the people who were 
ambulatory on the street. All we could basically 
tell them is just keep walking north, keep 
walking and you'll see additional EMS resources 
and the police staging area. Your best bet is 
just to keep walking as far away from the event, 
because we're really not sure of what's going on. 

We must have gotten two to three blocks 
south of Chambers Street, and I was still in awe 
of this spectacle that I'm witnessing. My 
partner and I were looking at tower two, and 
we're looking at I guess 20 stories -- 15 to 20 
stories down from the top of the roof just in 
flames and smoke. 

Then we hear a rumble, and we see a 
blast of smoke and a slight ball of flame coming 
out from the silhouette of the building, and we 
watched the antenna collapse into the building. 



W. SIMON 10 

To be honest with you, for about five seconds or 
so I was transfixed. I couldn't believe what I 
was seeing. From our perspective, it looked as 
though the antenna was falling towards us, north. 

We were motionless for maybe five 
seconds, until we realized that, hey, the 
building's coming down and now we've got to run 
for our lives. We turned at that point and told 
everybody else, "Listen, the building is 
collapsing. Run, run, run." 

I guess had the building toppled north 
and not collapsed into itself, we probably would 
have been victims in the road too, because we 
were close enough for that to have occurred. 

We sprinted for a good two to two and a 
half blocks through a mass of people who were 
running at various rates of speed. All we could 
really do is just tell people to just get out of 
the way, run, keep running north. 

We were initially looking for shelter. 
I believe there was a school on the right-hand 
side. All the doors, the accesses, were locked. 
We still felt as though we were in the path of 
the debris. I looked over my shoulder once and 



W. SIMON 11 

saw the cloud of debris coming up the street and 
particulate matter bouncing all over. At that 
point we still weren't certain that we were safe. 

We ran just as fast as we could, and we 
tried to seek shelter. Me personally, I know 
myself and one thing I feel good about is I 
didn't push anybody out of the way. It was 
everybody for themselves. 

After about two minutes of stark 
terror, then we realized that the blunt of the 
debris had already fallen and we were relatively 
safe. But there was still the dust, the smoke, 
the noise, the confusion and the panic on some of 
the civilians. But we knew we were relatively 
safe. 

Then the reality hit me that at that 
point we were witnessing, maybe not directly, but 
we knew hundreds of people must have perished at 
that moment. That was a sobering feeling. But 
you also thank God at that moment that you were 
able to survive or carry on or what set of 
circumstances allowed you to persevere. 

When we got to approximately Chambers 
Street, there was a lot of noise and we even 



W. SIMON 12 

heard shots. I've heard shots in Brooklyn 
before. I couldn't fathom what was going on 
unless maybe an officer fell and his weapon 
discharged or maybe they saw some people trying 
to loot. 

There were some windows blasted out, 
and we didn't know what had actually transpired 
at that point. But I'm told there were probably 
some officers that were firing to seek refuge in 
some of the locked buildings that I think was an 
adjacent school. They probably saved a lot of 
people from being in the direct debris path. At 
least that's what I'm told. I didn't know it on 
that particular day. 

After about ten minutes or so, things 
were unbelievably quiet. People regrouped, 
regathered. We made contact again with the EMS 
supervisors that were there, and we set up an 
additional triage area. We tried to restructure 
the triage area in I think Borough of Manhattan 
Community College on the north side of the 
building. A makeshift triage area was set up on 
the upper mezzanine. 

At that point myself and some volunteer 



W. SIMON 13 

EMTs and some people who I believe responded to 
the area from the voluntary hospitals started to 
man that location. We treated one or two police 
officers for dust inhalation and exhaustion. 

There was one young girl that was 
obviously in a state of total disbelief and 
severe anxiety. We examined her for any serious 
injuries. She just had some minor cuts and 
bruises. I think she was like all of us. She 
just couldn't believe the events that transpired 
and the circumstances that she was in the middle 
of. 

Shortly after that, I would say maybe 
about 15 minutes after setting up that area, we 
were instructed to evacuate that area and move 
further north to another safe location up by 
Chelsea Pier on 23rd Street because there was a 
report of a gas leak. 

So now we had to retrieve all the 
equipment that we had now deployed and put it 
back into the trucks, the trucks that were 
accessible to us, and move quickly up north. 

At this point there were two or three 
EMTs on my truck. My partner, Barry Hirsch, 



W. SIMON 14 

because of his training with special operations, 
he had gone with Lieutenant Santiago, and they 
had separated. He said that he would be back in 
a few minutes because they were going to see if 
they could coordinate and regroup and see what 
EMS units were in need of assistance further 
south . 

At this point, under the instruction of 
one of the lieutenants at the scene, we started 
to move the truck up north. There were a few 
civilians that were not as spry as some of the 
younger people, and we opened our doors and let 
them in. We transported them as far north as we 
could without jeopardizing their well-being. We 
let them exit at the Chelsea Piers. 

After that, that's basically where our 
unit remained until later that afternoon. I 
stayed and hooked up with one of the medics that 
I know from the academy, since I only had one 
partner at that point. 

I was with Tommy Maher until about 
5:00, 5:30 in the afternoon. Then we were 
released from the scene. From there I got back 
to Battalion 58 and dropped Tommy off and knew 



W. SIMON 



15 



they were going to get off the scene. 

Q. When you were up on Chambers and West, 
that's where you encountered Lieutenant Fenton 
and Captain Pinkus; right? 

A. Yeah, Lieutenant Pinkus, Lieutenant 



Pinkus 

Q 

A 

Q 

A 



Oh, communications; do you know? 
Maybe it's another Pinkus. 
Okay. 

I know he's from -- I know it's a 
Lieutenant Pinkus, and he's from Metropolitan. 
Q. When you were going south with your 
partner on West, do you recall how far, or what 
street you got to? 

A. We probably were somewhere between 
Barclay and Murray or down around Warren Street, 
somewhere over there. I know we were -- let's 
see, Chambers -- we may have gotten down about 
here, I would say down around Murray and Barclay. 
Q. Do you recall anything on your way down 
there, meeting up with any other EMS personnel 
along there that you remember? 

A. There might have been some personnel, 
but we didn't really have an encounter with them 



W. SIMON 16 

because they basically were responding north, and 
that was our instructions, to tell any units that 
were on West Street to respond north and where to 
respond. So we were assuming that all they had 
to do was continue north and they would run into 
the new staging area. 

Q. Right. 

Other than Lieutenants Fenton and 
Pinkus, do you remember any other officers up at 
Chambers? 

A. No, they were the two officers that -- 
there may have been more, but those are the 
officers that I actually had conversations with. 

Q. Any other thoughts or comments you'd 
like to add? 

A. I guess the only thing that I can say 
is that after the events of that morning, the 
tragedy, I get up every morning and I appreciate 
waking up more every morning. I appreciate my 
family more, my wife. 

My heart goes out to all those families 
that even today have no closure on the 
whereabouts, and may never have closure. I'm 
saddened just to think about the evil which 



W. SIMON 17 

wrought this type of devastation. 

My coworkers and associates, I hope 
that they will not have died in vain. 

MR. RADENBERG: The time is now 1644, 
and the interview is concluded. 



File No. 9110116 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

EMT RENAE 0' CARROLL 

Interview Date: October 18, 2001 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



R. 0' CARROLL 2 

MR. TAMBASCO: Today is October 18th. 
I'm Mike Tambasco assigned to the World 
Trade Center Task Force. I'm at EMS 
Battalion 39 in the lounge. The time is 
1603 hours. We're conducting an historical 
interview with EMT Renae 0' Carroll from 
working unit 39 Mary 2 on September 11th. 
Q. Renae, tell us your story. 
A. My partner Eddie Rodriguez and I logged 
on that morning at 8:00 39 Mary. Our first call 
came about 8:20 that morning -- no, more like 
8:35, downtown Brooklyn. The call was a dupe to 
another unit's job. I can't remember. I think 
it was a 31 unit. I'm not sure. 

We gave our position to the dispatcher 
that we were 98. We looked up and we saw this 
big mound of smoke. We turned the radio on, and 
we heard a lot of screaming and noise on the 
radio. We pulled over, went into a laundromat, 
because we saw a lot of people crowded around a 
television. That's where we saw what was going 
on . 

We called up the dispatcher. It was 
really hard to get through. We went on Manhattan 



R. 0' CARROLL 3 

frequency. That was the only one that was 
working. We told them that we would like to go 
down there and help if they needed anyone else. 
Q. Right. 

A. They said, "Yes, we were trying to call 
you, we didn't hear you, to send you over there." 

We went down Atlantic Avenue going 
towards the Manhattan Bridge, and the heat was so 
intense, so intense, you could actually feel it 
while you were up on the bridge. I mean that 
intense you could feel the heat. Cars were 
coming this way, and we were driving that way. 

They assigned us to go to Church and 
Vesey. We were going towards that area. The 
cars are coming this way. People are screaming 
and running, and we're going the opposite 
direction into the mess, into the belly of the 
beast of this thing. I still can't believe I had 
the nerve to do that to this day. 

We got down there, and the scene was 
just horrendous. I've never seen anything like 
this before in my life. You were kind of afraid, 
but you knew you had a job to do. You knew there 
were people in there. 



R. 0' CARROLL 4 

We went to the corner of Church and 
Vesey. That's where they had staging at. We 
were the third vehicle in line, one of the first 
units actually down there. The lieutenant there 
just said feel around and pick up whoever you 
can . 

Q. You don't know who the lieutenant was, 
do you? 

A. I can't remember. 

At that point it was just mass hysteria 
down there. Nothing was really organized, 
because the mounds of people were just running 
all over the place. You were just picking up 
people that you saw screaming. That's how 
horrendous the scene was down there. We had our 
staging area, but because of the mass amounts of 
people -- you had FBI, you had police officers, 
you had corrections. You had everyone who was 
anyone down there. 

We grabbed three people off of the 
ground. We had an elderly lady. She looked like 
she was burnt. At that time there was really no 
triaging. You were just pulling out of the 
mounds of people those that looked like they were 



R. 0' CARROLL 5 

viable. 

We had three ladies, one elderly. She 
looked like she might have been burnt, maybe 
heat-related, and two other ones. One was 
ambulatory, and the other two weren't. We 
grabbed them and put them in the vehicle. My 
partner said, "Close the door and let's go." 

We were down there for maybe 11 minutes 
before the building fell. My partner Eddie said, 
go to the front and let's get out of here. I 
said we're going to go. At that point -- 

Q. The building actually came down at that 
point? 

A. The building wasn't down yet. I was 
getting ready to pull out, and the transportation 
officer waved me over. He wanted to tell me what 
hospital to go to. 

Q. Right. 

A. I had my back turned towards the 
building, because we were directly in front of 
the building at Church and Vesey. I had my back 
to him. He was facing the building, looking over 
my shoulder. He looked up, and he had the look 
of fear on his face. 



R. 0' CARROLL 6 

I heard something that sounded like 
marbles crashing down. At that point I looked 
behind me. I heard everyone say run. I looked 
behind me, and it was a gigantic blob of ash and 
molt and fire and everything just behind you, and 
I ran. Everyone was running. 

I tried to grab people. People was 
grabbing on to me. We were just running, 
running, running. I have never seen anything 
like that before. I understand what someone says 
I looked death in the face. That was death 
coming to me. That's all I know. 

I'm running. I'm ahead of it. 
Everyone's running, and it's just a stampede. 
I'm about ten feet in front of it, running, 
actually sprinting because I'm an athlete and I'm 
running. What happened when I got to the corner, 
because I remember my feet hitting, coming off 
the sidewalk, another blob of stuff came around. 

Ash came around another building in 
front me, and it caught me in front of me and in 
back of me, and everything was pitch-black. 
Where it hit me from the front and the back, it 
actually lifted me off the ground and threw me. 



R. 0' CARROLL 7 

It was like someone picked me up and just threw 
me on the ground. 

Everything was pitch-black. You 
couldn't see anything. All I saw was big bolts 
of fire, fire balls. I could feel the heat 
around me. It was pitch-black. I couldn't see 
anything at all. My lungs, my airways, 
everything filled up with ash. I couldn't 
breathe. I couldn't see anything. 

I got back off of the ground, and I'm 
moving around. I heard people screaming, begging 
for help. I could feel something on my ankle; I 
don't know what it was. It was pitch-black, and 
I'm feeling. At this point I walk into 
something, and it knocked me on the ground again. 
I don't know what it was, but I hit my forehead 
on something. 

It was just basically dark. I had 
never been through anything -- I thought I was 
dying. The only thing I could see was balls of 
fire, just balls of fire. At one point I thought 
I was on fire because it was that close to me. I 
could feel the heat. I said to myself, wow, I'm 
on fire. This is what it feels like to be on 



R. 0' CARROLL 8 

fire. I don't know what it feels like to be on 
fire. I thought that's what it feels like to be 
on fire. 

At this point I couldn't breathe 
anymore. I lie on the ground. I couldn't even 
get up. I couldn't move. I couldn't do 
anything. I thought I was dying. That's 
basically it. I thought that I was dying. 

At this point I laid down, and I 
started saying my prayers. Having memories of my 
kids, my mother, people at work. I mean, my 
whole life is just flashing in front of my eyes. 
What they say is true, everything is just 
flashing. I accepted it, because I didn't feel I 
could move on. It took the wind out of me and 
everything . 

I just lie there and I was praying. I 
looked up to my left, and I saw a light opening 
up in the sky. I figured that maybe the ashes 
and stuff is clearing a break. It was a 
beautiful day out. The day was sunny, bright and 
warm. I remember very well, it was a beautiful 
day. 

I looked up and it didn't seem like the 



R. 0' CARROLL 9 

sky; it seemed like a different type of light. 
Whatever this light was I was looking at, it made 
me feel safe and secure. I felt that that was 
the light that everyone's talking about. I said 
to myself at that moment I guess this is the 
light, I guess this is my time. I felt it was 
opening up and it was my time to go. 

I didn't have any fear. Whatever fear 
I had prior to that, I didn't feel it. I just 
felt safe like someone was cradling me, and I 
accepted it. I was getting ready to die. I was 
losing my breath. Something told me - - I looked 
to the left on the ground, and I saw a red light. 
I don't know what that was. I'm thinking it's 
another light. 

I can laugh about this now. At that 
time I couldn't laugh about it. I couldn't laugh 
about it. 

And that's when I put my hand to the 
left to see what that light was, and I felt 
glass. What happened to me was just a miracle. 
The glass door opened up. It was a door. It 
opened up. It opened up, and it felt like 
someone put their hands under me just pulled me, 



R. 0' CARROLL 10 

picked me up and pulled me. 

I rolled down some stairs, and the door 
behind me closed. Down there it was a basement 
to somewhere. I remember there was a subway 
station that I ran past. I figured maybe it was 
the other side of the subway station. 

The first thing I saw when I got up was 
a bucket of mop water. I needed to clean my eyes 
out. I took and I put the mop water in my face. 
I felt, whatever 's in this water, if that didn't 
kill me, this is not going to. I took and I 
washed my face off just to see, because I 
couldn't breathe and I was blind. I could feel 
my J.V.D. My neck was rigid. I felt that I was 
still dying. 

I felt around. I could see only maybe 
half a foot in front of me, half a foot in front 
of me. I'm doing like this, and I'm feeling. I 
saw something that said "men." It was a men's 
room. I couldn't get the door open. It had a 
padlock just like this station door. I couldn't 
open it up. 

There was one that said ladies' room 
across there, and I started saying, "God, how am 



R. 0' CARROLL 11 

I going to get in here? You brought me in this 
far. You're going to let me die down here?" I 
started questioning him, "Why didn't you let me 
die with everybody else up there? Why bring me 
down here?" 

What happened next was very amazing. 
From out of nowhere I just pressed the numbers 
325, and the door opened up. And that's the same 
numbers that we have on the station door. 
Q. On the station lock. 

A. 325. That was the only numbers I could 
think of. I couldn't think of any other numbers 
to a padlock. It opened up. 

When I got inside of there, there was 
water. I turned the water on, and I washed my 
face. I cleared my airway out. I made myself 
vomit to get the stuff out of me. I cleared my 
nose out. I did that again. I looked in the 
mirror to make sure that I didn't have any more 
J.V.D., and that was going away and I was able to 
breathe better now. 

I drank some water. Now I really 
needed to flush my eyes, but the water wasn't 
coming out fast enough in the faucet. So what I 



R. 0' CARROLL 12 

did, I went and kneeled down over the toilet. I 
figured if upstairs didn't kill me, the toilet 
water is not going to kill me either. 

I kneeled on it and I put my hand on 
the flush and I let the water go down. As it was 
coming up, I washed my eyes out, and I was able 
to see around me. I looked around and saw I was 
in a bathroom and that it had vents up there and 
that there was no smoke in there. 

I wet paper towels and put it around 
the door. I was exhausted at this point. I lie 
down. I found out later on when I lie down and I 
went -- I don't know if I lost consciousness or 
what. I went to sleep. I found out later that's 
when the other building fell. Because when I was 
down there, that was the first building that 
fell. 

Q. Right. 

A. I tell you, it's amazing. It's really 
amazing. When I woke up, I don't know how -- 
they told me I was missing seven or eight hours. 
I don't know. I was asleep. I was asleep. I 
was asleep a long time. 

I got up. I had no sense of time. I 



R. 0' CARROLL 13 

got up, and I start thinking what should I do? I 
need to get out of here. I closed the door and I 
checked the numbers again to make sure I wasn't 
dreaming. It opened up. I was afraid to close 
it. I put something there. 

Q. To hold the door open? 

A. Yeah, because I knew I needed to get 
back there. Just so I wouldn't lose my way when 
I go running around, I took some tissue paper and 
I laid it out . 

Q. A trail of bread crumbs? 

A. Yeah, I did. I made a trail to find 
out where -- so I could get back there, because 
that was a safe haven for me. There was no smoke 
or anything. 

I found out it was a boiler room, 
because it had an engineering door and it had a 
padlock on it. Then there was another one that 
said electrical. It was basically a work area on 
the side of the subway station. 

I found an open window. I went to it 
to get some fresh air. I was afraid. There was 
nobody down there but me. It was dark, 
pitch-black, except a little light in the corner. 



R. 0' CARROLL 14 

I should have been afraid, but I really wasn't, 
to be honest, because I felt now God was with me. 
He brought me through all of this and there was a 
reason I'm here and I didn't fear I was going to 
die at this point, just how to get out of here. 

Q. Right. 

A. I couldn't remember how I got in there. 
I didn't remember. 

I saw some stairways. I went up the 
stairways. The door wasn't open on the first 
floor. I went up another flight. It wouldn't 
open. The third floor let me in. On the third 
floor was two glass doors to an office. I saw a 
phone. I'm trying to get in there, but it was 
closed. It had a doorbell on it, and I rang the 
doorbell, like somebody's going to be there to 
open it; right? Like somebody is going to open 
it for me. I'm ringing it. 

I saw a fire extinguisher, and I'm 
trying to get it out of the glass. I had nothing 
on me. My radio had fallen, everything. I 
didn't have my cell phone on me. I couldn't get 
in, because I was going to crack the door if I 
could get to the phone to call somebody. 



R. 0' CARROLL 15 

At this point I was still tired. I 
wasn't breathing the way I should. I was still a 
little tired. So I went back downstairs, 
following the trail, and I went back in there and 
I went back to sleep. I don't know when I got up 
again. I don't know. I got up again, and I said 
I better go back out there again. 

I felt a little more rested. I was 
breathing a little better. I walked the opposite 
direction this time, and that's the way that I 
found my way out . 

Q. To the top of the street? 
A. Yeah, because that was the glass door. 
When I looked out there -- I got there, and I 
looked out there. It looked like hell. There 
were there on the ground. No, there were parts 
on the ground. There was metal on the ground. 
It was ashes and everything. It looked like a 
third-world country. You had people running, 
screaming. Ambulances at this time was running 
one man . 

I opened the door and did like this, 
and someone grabbed my hand. A police lady 
grabbed my hand, and she dragged me. I said, 



R. 0' CARROLL 16 

"Help me. I can't really breathe." She was 
crying and everything like that. We were pretty 
much holding each other up. 

She jumped out in the street, and an 
ambulance --it was a private ambulance, maybe 
Cabrini or New York Hospital. I'm not sure. At 
this point they were riding one man with the 
doors open and no equipment and whoever could 
jump in jumped in. 

She took me and she threw me in the 
bus. She threw me in the bus. The guy said, 
"Get in and let's go." She threw me in there, 
and I said, "Please come with me." I grabbed her 
hand. She said, "I can't. I have to stay." I 
have to stay and help people. She couldn't 
breathe herself. 

I wish I could see her again one day, a 
little small thing. 

Q. You have no idea who she was? 
A. I don't know who she was. I don't know 
who she was. I got in there. She might have 
been an angel. I don't know who she was. 

The ambulance made two more stops with 
the door open. No equipment in the back. He's 



R. 0' CARROLL 17 

riding one man. He's got ashes on him himself. 

Q. At this time how late was this? Do you 
have any idea? 

A. I don't know. 

Q. No concept of time? 

A. I had nothing. I don't know anything. 
I didn't know anything until I got to the 
hospital. 

At this point he stopped to let two 
more people in, a police officer, an Officer 
Palono from the first transit -- from District 1, 
I think it was. I don't know. He came in. He 
was saying, "I can't breathe." I found one 
pediatric oxygen mask. I turned it on, and I 
gave it to him. 

Q. Right. 

A. I helped him. I put it on him and told 
him it's going to be okay. I'm not all right 
myself. I said, "You're going to be okay." I 
said, "Let's pray." Then they stopped and 
another elderly lady, I grabbed her hand, pulled 
her in and shared the mask between the two of 
them. 

Q. Right. 



R. 0' CARROLL 18 

A. We laid back there, just on the floor, 
sat there and prayed. 

The ambulance pulled up to -- I found 
out later it was Beekman Hospital. There someone 
opened the door, and they grabbed us out. They 
just grabbed people out and threw you on a 
stretcher. The first thing they did was to make 
sure your airway was clear. Then what they did 
after that was take you and throw you in the 
shower to wash all of this stuff off. 

I still had no concept of time. I 
didn't know what time it was. It was still 
daylight. But because of all the ash and 
everything flying around, it looked like it was 
nighttime. 

Being in the hospital, it was like 
being on a conveyer belt. You went from one room 
to the next. They sent you from there to -- from 
the shower they sent you to another room where 
you got your eyes -- they put drops in your eyes. 
Then they sent you back to the airway room. 
There must have been a thousand people in each 
room. They were going down the line, actually 
putting drops in everyone's eyes. 



R. 0' CARROLL 19 

It was just the worst day that -- I 
hope to God I never go through anything like that 
again. I've never seen anything like this 
before, never, never, never. 

The job tries to prepare you for stuff 
like this, but for something like that there is 
really no way of preparing somebody for this; 
there really isn't. You wouldn't think in a 
million years something like that would happen. 

Q. Right. What happened with your 
partner? 

A. I don't know. I thought he was dead. 

Q. You lost touch with him at that point, 
and that was it? 

A. I didn't even remember anything about 
him. I don't know. I didn't remember anything. 
I didn't remember anything. I don't know what 
even happened. All I know is I saw a blob of 
smoke, and that was it. I don't know. I felt 
something lift me up and down the stairs. I 
don't know. I don't know. I don't know 
anything . 

I remember my belt, my belt with my 
pink scissors. The building I was in, where I 



R. 0' CARROLL 20 

made the trail, my belt is down there with the 
pink scissors on it. So if ever they find it, 
that ' s where I was . 

Q. That's where you were. 
A. Yes, I sure did. 

I was in the hospital I don't even know 
how many hours. Finally I made my way to a 
phone. They made an announcement that the phones 
were up, that there's one phone on each floor 
that the patients can use. I was on a line of 
maybe 80 people. 

When it got to be my turn, I called to 
let them know I was okay. The lieutenant was on 
there. He was crying. The captain was on the 
phone, Captain Medeiros. He was crying. I was 
crying . 

That's basically it. I stayed in the 
hospital, and a unit brought me back to Division 
4. I took a shower there. I cleaned up. They 
gave me a towel. I didn't have anything on. The 
only thing I had left of mine was my boots. 

Someone brought me from there back to 
Brooklyn, and the whole station, everyone from 
all three tours was there. When I came, they 



R. 0' CARROLL 21 

were clapping, and we all cried. It was just 
beautiful. 

But I'm glad that I was there and they 
weren't, because it might have turned out 
differently. 

Q. Right, right. 

A. It wasn't my time to go. That's all it 
is . 

That's it. That's my story. 
Q. That's a story all right. 
A. Yeah. 

I went back down there two weeks later 
to help out at the morgue, because it was really 
bothering me. I had to go back down there, 
because I felt I ran away the first time. This 
time I had to go back and face it. I had to have 
some closure. I had to go back down there and 
face it . 

I went back down there, and I said I'll 
work staging, because I had to get over that 
fear. They said, "No, you're going to the 
morgue." I was in the morgue for 22 hours. 22 
hours. I had to get back there and face whatever 
it was . 



R. 0' CARROLL 22 

Q. Right. 

A. I know if something like that happens 
again I'll just have to do my best. I'll 
probably still react the same way. While people 
are running out, I'll just go towards it. That's 
it. 

Do you have any questions to ask me? 

Q. No. 

A. That's it. 

Q. Nothing else you want to say, that's 
it. Renae, thanks very much for your interview, 
quite a story. 

A. It is. 

MR. TAMBASCO: This interview is 

concluded at 1625 hours. 



File No. 9110118 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMT MARK MAZUR 
Interview Date: October 19, 2001 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



M. MAZUR 2 

MR. RADENBERG: Today is October 19th, 
2001. I am Paul Radenberg of the Fire 
Department, City of New York. The time is 
now 0651 hours. I am conducting an 
interview with - - 

EMT MAZUR: Mark Mazur, EMS command, 
shield 3613. 

MR. RADENBERG: We are conducting the 
interview at the Division 4 office, and this 
interview is regarding the events of 
September 11th, 2001. 

A. Pretty much that day started like any 
other normal day. I logged in at 6:00 in the 
morning. Around 8 or so I was monitoring 
citywide radio. One of the officers heard all 
the commotion going on on citywide. 

I called my counterparty, who was on 
the road with the LSI) truck. So we could man the 
MERV van, and that was specialist Bobby Short. 
When he came in, we went downstairs. 
We were watching the TV and found out that a 
plane had hit the World Trade Center. So we load 
up the MERV van with new equipment that it needed 
in the truck, stuff like that, the ALS equipment. 



M. MAZUR 3 

I threw my equipment in the LSI) truck. 

We met Assistant Chief Pete 
Carrasquillo at the division. He loaded up his 
car with the duty captain and his aides, and they 
went up to -- they were going down to the event. 
They told us to relocate to Battalion 45 
Woodside, wait for Lieutenant Hadala and any 
personnel that come down to respond into the 
event . 

Pretty much the radio was -- all you 
heard was like commotion going on. You couldn't 
get through to the dispatcher, because they knew 
that LSI) 4 and MERV van 4 were responding in. We 
finally got through to them for that. 

We were coming over the 59th Street 
bridge. We were looking over at the towers, and 
you could actually see the people jumping. At 
first I thought it was funny, because you see 
these little X's coming off. You say, "What the 
hell are these things?" You're thinking then 
those X's are people coming off. 

As we were coming over the last bit of 
the 59th Street Bridge, tower one collapsed. The 
radio pretty much went dead. When we came in, I 



M. MAZUR 4 

tell you, what helped us out the most was the 
traffic department. You know, those guys are 
always made fun of. They had everything shut 
down, and we had such a breeze coming over the 
bridge. The traffic was shut down. 

When I hit 57th Street, everything was 
shut down and we just came down like gangbusters. 
When we respond with a MERV, we need two escort 
vehicles, because that thing doesn't go fast 
enough. So if you try not to stop it, you can 
get there faster. So we were blocking streets. 

We got to the West Side Highway, and we 
saw a lot of people walking down. When we 
arrived 84 at the scene, where the first, I 
guess, staging area was, a lot of firemen there. 
Everybody was packing up and getting their hose 
packs and bottles and stuff like that, and 
walking down. 

Q. Do you remember what street that was? 

A. West Side Highway. 

Q. And the cross street? 

A. Not offhand. If I looked on this 
little thing that you have here, if that's the 
foot bridge, it had to be the first one by Warren 



M. MAZUR 5 

Street. Then Warren Street, we crossed over the 
other side of West Side Highway. We came down 
the opposite side of the West Side Highway facing 
out, because we had a bunch of fire apparatus 
that were parked all the way down. 

So we stayed on the other side to come 
up, and then we crossed over by Vesey. That's 
where the MERV was. We started staging up over 
here. 

Lieutenant Hadala and his command car 
came on the other side of the West Side Highway 
with me, and then I parked just on the other side 
of that foot bridge by Stuyvesant School, I guess 
it is. 

Q. Stuyvesant, I believe, is up here by 
Chambers. 

A. Then it's this -- 

Q. This is the American Express. 

A. That's what we did. The white foot 
bridge that comes over? 

Q. Right. 

A. Yeah, okay, I was just on the other 
side of this, and I crossed back over. Over here 
you had a bunch of fire apparatus that was on the 



M. MAZUR 6 

south side of the street. What I did was I nosed 
my truck in between them, because I needed the 
back doors of my truck, I don't need the front. 
Q. Right. 

A. Then, again, I noticed firemen carrying 
hose packs, bottles and stuff like that. 

After I parked my truck, I started 
taking my equipment out and all of a sudden I 
heard this sound. It sounded like a jet, a high, 
whistling sound. There was like a rumble behind 
it. It was like a jet with a locomotive behind 
it. 

I heard people screaming. All of a 
sudden, the firemen that were behind me were 
throwing their hose packs down. When I came out 
of the back of the truck, I looked up and I saw 
the second tower coming down. The second tower 
was coming down. 

Everybody just started to run down the 
West Side Highway. So with this I jumped out of 
the truck. A police car was coming up. It was 
snaking the traffic like I did. He stopped 
behind my truck, threw it in reverse and was 
going back. I jumped on his hood, because I 



M. MAZUR 7 

can't run that fast. I rode that for about a 
hundred feet. He hit a car, and when he hit the 
car, I rolled off the hood again and I just kept 
on running down the street. 

Q. Was he going back up north? 

A. Yeah. When the building came down, it 
had to be like a ten-story dust cloud or storm 
that came after us, and you didn't know what the 
hell was in there. All you saw was papers and 
you could see like the light in the papers. You 
didn't know if it was glass or whatever. It just 
turned the whole street dark, and it just came 
over. The best I could describe it is like a 
tidal wave that was coming towards us. 

By the time I stopped running, it was 
like Barclay or -- you really couldn't tell, 
because when it hit you, it actually knocked you 
down, the motion of that pressure behind that. 
When I got up, there was dirt and dust 
everywhere. You really couldn't see. You 
couldn't breathe. 

I made it back to the LSU truck. I had 
about, I'd say, 10 to 15 firemen in the back of 
my truck. They were bewildered. They didn't 



M. MAZUR 8 

know what to think. So I pulled my multi-laters 
out of the back with these subway manifolds, so 
you can give multiple 02. 
Q. Right. 

A. I hooked them up, and I started to give 
a 02 to everybody. I pulled all my masks out, so 
I gave them masks to guys that were still trying 
to get up to the scene, to rescue people. 

Pretty much it was pandemonium going 
on. You could hear -- the thing was, I'm a 
fireman, a volunteer fireman. You could hear the 
pass alarms going off, all over the place. You 
didn't know what you had. 

I was working there, there was a 
Hazollah truck that was right across from me. 
They were giving care to everybody. I was 
working with a guy from Hazollah, and you hear 
these explosions going off. It was crazy 
because -- what the hell was going on? 

A fire lieutenant or EMS lieutenant -- 
I don't know, you couldn't tell because he was 
covered with dust. He came up to me and said, 
"Does this truck run?" I don't know. It was 
covered with papers from the World Trade Center 



M. MAZUR 9 

and dust. He said, "If it runs, get out of here; 
if it don't, then abandon the truck and just get 
out of here. We don't know if we're going to 
lose the whole area, because there were gas leaks 
under the sewer caps in the sewers." 

So what I did is I took everything that 
I had out. I threw it in the back of the truck. 
The last patient I had was a Port Authority 
female. She was encrusted in this thing, in the 
dust. She couldn't see. I put her in the front 
seat . 

I got my truck started. I backed out 
and then we pulled down the West Side Highway 
until we hit a safe area, which I don't know 
where it was. They had a fire hose hooked up on 
a stanchion like a shower. I took her out and 
hosed her off. 

We ran into my friend Bobby from LSI) -- 
from our MERV van. Both of us moved our trucks 
all the way down until we ran into two 
lieutenants and Commissioner Claire. We asked 
him, "Where do you want us to go?" Trucks are 
needed, we're getting back in service. He said, 
"Wait here," and just kept on walking. He really 



M. MAZUR 10 

didn't know what -- again, we were all -- nobody 
knew what was going on. We had no real command 
stations. 

Q. So you don't remember where that was 
that you met up with him? 

A. There was a restaurant there, Ponte's 
at Desbrosses Street. We were up by Desbrosses 
Street. That's where we were. I went to that 
restaurant one time. 

Q. North of Chambers? 

A. Yeah. 

While we were there -- when that blast 
hit, that pretty much blew everything out of the 
MERV van. What we did, we got the MERV van 
operational and got all the equipment back on, 
put it where it was supposed to be, got it dusted 
out as best as possible. 

We pulled the equipment out of the LSI) 
truck, because it had like two inches of dust 
inside, the multi-laters were covered with dust. 
I blew all the regulators out. Now that was back 
in service again. Pretty much just threw all the 
big debris that we had in the truck out. My cab 
was filled because the windows were open. 



M. MAZUR 11 

The only thing that saved my truck was 
because I angled in when I pulled in between 
those trucks because everybody that was next to 
me blew their windshields out of their trucks. 
They got really blasted. Mine, I had papers and 
stuff like that inside, and dust and sand. But 
it saved my truck. 

Once we were at that staging area by 
Desbrosses Street, we used my cell phone, because 
it was the only one that was working. 
Communications was screwed. We got in touch with 
citywide. They deployed us to Greenwich Street 
and somewhere down, I think. Is Greenwich on 
here? 

Q. No. 

A. Greenwich would be like up in here. I 
think this was Greenwich. They sent us to 
Greenwich Street. We reported over there and set 
up a treatment area. Greenwich Street and 
Murray, right over here. There was I think some 
kind of school or office building. 

We set up a treatment area utilizing 
the equipment from the LSI) and MERV van. We had 
a bunch of doctors from all around the country, 



M. MAZUR 12 

really. There were all kind of doctors. They 
were here for a seminar. 

Q. Right. 

A. They shipped the seminar down there and 
over to us. So we begin working over there. 
Again, we were just like covered with all the 
dust and crap and all. 

Then the third building fell. That was 
over here. 

Q. That was number seven, I believe. 

A. There were a bunch of people standing 
on the corner of Greenwich and Murray Street. It 
was funny because we had two lieutenants who I 
didn't really know. All of a sudden when the 
building came down, it started stampeding all the 
people. When the people started stampeding, he 
said, "Go out there and slow them down." 
Did you ever see Animal House? 
Remember that guy? I had that shot in my mind. 
I said, "You've got to be crazy." I'm a big guy. 
These people are out there trampling. So I stood 
on the back of my truck, holding onto the door 
rails saying, "Slow down, everybody." People 
were getting stomped in front of us. Then that 



M. MAZUR 13 

stopped . 

We were there I'd say till about 8:30, 
9:00. Then they moved us over to the Battery 
Park side. They wanted the LSI) and MERV over to 
there, the treatment area. 

That out of the whole deal has to be 
the most scariest part of the whole deal, because 
when we picked up -- you have to picture -- I 
don't know if you were there -- how heavy the 
dust and dirt was. When night came, it was just 
dark, no lights in that area. They had us 
driving all different side blocks to try to get 
on the other side of the World Trade Center. 

So we were driving down this one 
block -- again, I don't know the names. I was 
following in the MERV. It was smoky, dusty, and 
you could hear a mouse it was so quiet. It was 
really eerie. 

When we came up this block we saw 
burned out fire trucks, crushed ambulances, 
burned-out police cars. It looked like downtown 
Beirut. Plus you had fire hoses all over the 
place. We were jumping over fire hoses with the 
vehicles. The headlights didn't work because it 



M. MAZUR 14 

was so dark. 

All of a sudden you see silhouettes of 
firemen pop up. Guys like walking away from the 
battle. They're like, "Hey, brother, how ya 
doing? Got any water?" They were just wiped out 
at that point. It's like, "Yeah, I've got a 
water here." You hand it out of the truck. 

It was the most eeriest feeling. You 
couldn't tell what was in front of you. You 
didn't know if there was another building like 
leaning over. You can see all these crushed cars 
and vehicles. What's up above me? 

Q. Right. 

A. They put us on the opposite side, the 
Battery Park side. They had us park in front of 
a building. Then a bunch of people came up and 
said, "You have to move your truck because this 
building is going to collapse." I think it was 
the American Express building. It was unsafe or 
leaning, or something like that. 

So they backed me up by the water. 
Again, I don't know the street, those Battery 
Park buildings, you know. 

Q. Yeah. 



M. MAZUR 15 

A. Those high condos or apartments. It 
was right on the water. We backed down this 
block and we got the MERV and the LSI) set up and 
had a bunch of ambulances coming. 

That night we were there about -- we 
got down at that point about 11:00. We finally 
got released from there -- we set up the 
treatment area about 4:30 in the morning, quarter 
to 5. Then we were sent up to the command post 
back on the West Side Highway. 

We got released about 7, 7:00. It was 
a pretty long day. I came in around 6. So I was 
on borrowed time on that. 

Q. When you were here by West and Vesey, 
by the pedestrian bridge, do you remember, aside 
from Bobby Short, any other EMS personnel, or 
officers, that were there? 

A. No. Oh, by the time I got done 
running, you had Tony Dimao, who's from M.T.D. 
You had Mike Felice from M.T.D. , deputy director, 
the motor transport division. It was funny, 
because when I got done running from that blast, 
I turned around and said Tony -- because you 
couldn't see the block anymore. I turned around 



16 

to Tony Dimao -- we're always fighting to get a 
new truck. I think I need a new truck by now. 

He looked down the block and said, "I 
think so." I know he went back down again, Tony 
Dimao and Felice because they got an engine -- 
they got a truck and a rescue truck out before we 
lost them, the trucks themselves. Unfortunately 
the personnel was still in the building. He told 
me when they moved the trucks they had to move 
some EPA escort. The guy moved it and he said, 
"Well, that's almost a million dollars of 
equipment they were trying to get saved and get 
out." It's like a $7,000 high-tech (inaudible). 

Anything else I ran into? Again, I had 
the Hazollah guys there with me. That's -- 
Hadala, Tony Dimao, Mike Felice. I think I took 
care of their boss. I don't know who their boss 
is. I don't know if he was in charge of -- in 
charge of fleet, because he had a knee injury. I 
took care of him when I went to that safe area 
and got the shower. 

Q. Right. 

A. I gave him some ice packs because his 
knee was all swollen. 



M. MAZUR 17 

Again, we didn't know what was going 
on. When we responded in, we only knew a plane. 
We didn't know about a second plane hitting. We 
saw the fire in the two towers, when we came off 
the 59th Street Bridge. We thought it jumped 
over, but we didn't know a second plane had hit. 

When we responded in, we had the first 
tower went down. All we knew was that everybody 
was gone. Those are the people you work with, 
like my chief and everything, the duty captain 
and all. They were in front of us. They were at 
the command post. So we didn't know they were 
still around until about 7:00 that night. 

I called up my division, this office, 
and talked to somebody, and they said, "Oh, no, 
we heard from this one, we heard from this one." 
The lieutenants we were working with down on 
Greenwich Street, they had no clue. As far as 
they knew, Chief Carrasquillo was missing, 
Captain Deshore was missing, Captain Rivera, 
Chief Brown's missing, Chief Mittleman's missing. 
He went down the whole list. 

Then he said, "LSII is missing." I 
said, "Oh, stop there. I'm LSI). I know where I 



M. MAZUR 18 

am. " 

Q. There you go. 

A. So we're back with the people again, 
because they thought we were gone. Their last 
dispatch was that we were 84, up on the West Side 
Highway up there. We rectified that. 

After that they had me on the missing 
list when they screwed up on something else. 
That's when we called the division office and 
finally talked to somebody and found out 
everybody we worked with was pretty much still 
around . 

Again, we didn't find out it was a 
terrorist attack until we went to that safe area 
by Desbrosses Street. Getting the truck set up, 
someone said, "Watch out for anymore aircraft." 
"What are you talking about?" We don't have 
AM-FM radios in our trucks. 

They said, "Well, they hijacked so many 
planes and this is an attack on America. They 
attacked the Pentagon. We were totally 
clueless." "What are we talking about? What's 
going on?" They said, "Watch out for any 
aircraft. If you hear any aircraft, duck down." 



M. MAZUR 



19 



All of a sudden we heard the helicopters. They 
were guys coming in from New Jersey, cobras, so 
they were our attack helicopters. 

Q. Right. 

A. Then about five minutes later what 
really scared the hell out of us, we heard a jet 
coming down. It was an F-16 that came roaring up 
the Hudson River. It's like where the hell did 
he come from? Then it sunk in, they weren't 
kidding, because I thought they were kidding us. 
They said no, we're under attack. I thought that 
was somebody's wild imagination. 

All of a sudden this F-16 is whipping 
down the Hudson. I go, holy shit, this must be 
really happening. They are after us. Now the 
big boys are here. You don't see military jets 
flying over. 

Q. Yeah, yeah. 

Who was the duty captain? 

A. Rivera. 

Q. Rivera? 

A. Yeah. He was trapped for a while. 

Q. J.R.? 

A. Yeah. First day in Queens. He was 



M. MAZUR 20 

happy too because I gave him a locker that day, 
and everything. 

Q. Do you remember who the aides were? 

A. Katz, Jason Katz and Sal Sangeniti. 

Q. Sangeniti? 

A. Yeah, an Italian guy. Sal Sangeniti is 
Chief Carrasquillo ' s aide. Jason Katz is Chief 
Day's aide. Chief Day is out with an arm injury. 

Q. Chief Day was at -- 

A. He was not at the scene. He's been out 
with an arm injury. The captain in the division, 
he went in with Chief Carrasquillo, the captain 
and Sal. 

Did you talk to Captain Deshore? 

Q. Not yet. 

A. She was trapped for a while. She was 
forward command. We thought we lost her. She's 
a tough German captain, so we figured we would 
find her in New Jersey. She got rescued on the 
boat . 

Q. Right. 

A. When the second tower came down -- 
before the second tower came down, they got them 
off onto either a PD or fire boat. She was in 



M. MAZUR 21 

there with some people from the treatment area. 
We figured if she was in Jersey she was probably 
ordering people around. She's a tough captain. 

That's pretty much everybody we worked 
with in Queens. A lot of Queens people were 
there. Unfortunately, we lost Carlos Lillo. 

Q. Any thoughts or comments? 

A. The thoughts, again, it was 
unfortunately an unforeseen tragedy. If it 
happened again today, pretty much we would have 
to do it the same way right now. I have a lot of 
friends that were in that building. Firemen on 
the job. All of us in that building would say, 
"We'll stay back here because it's safe." 

We all came in knowing there's risk on 
this job and we know we have to go in there and 
get people out. They saved thousands of people. 
You can't imagine how many people they saved. 
Unfortunately they all lost their lives. 

A building that big, you can't try to 
figure out every emergency that could happen to 
it. 

Did you see that special on the History 
Channel? 



M. MAZUR 22 

Q. No. I have it on tape. I'm waiting. 
A. Again, the guy said it. He said it in 
one sentence. He said, "You can't figure out 
kamikaze commercial jetliners." No way you can 
write that in the book. You can't plan for 
something like that. 

Again, we got caught really bad this 
time. I don't think anybody acted out of the 
ordinary as far as bravery goes or doing their 
job. But they had to do what they had to do. 
Unfortunately to the end. If I had another job, 
would I hold back? No. It's not in me. If I 
was going to hold back, I wouldn't be on the job. 
It makes you really think, take stock in what you 
have. 

Everybody did what they had to do. 
Communications could have been better, but it was 
hard because when we were coming up to the scene 
all you heard was those people trapped, over the 
command frequency and citywide. It gave you that 
much more adrenaline to get up there and try to 
get these people. When the second tower came 
down, you had enough. 

The radios were pretty much dead. The 



M. MAZUR 23 

800 trunking radios were working very -- you know 
the 800 frequency? 
Q. Right. 

A. They were working very shabby. You had 
the repeaters on the World Trade Center. That's 
about it. The cell phones weren't working. Only 
AT&T was working. 

But I got to admit, everybody stuck 
together. The system was working. I lost my 
beeper and my cell phone. I found the cell phone 
right away. It fell in the back of the truck 
when I jumped out. When I jumped on the police 
car, I must have lost my beeper in the Street. 

It's funny, about a week ago the police 
property office, they called my Fire Department 
and said, "We have a beeper." They said they 
checked and have it assigned to a Mark Mazur, is 
he with your department. One of the guys there 
said, "Yeah, he works for the N.Y.C. Fire 
Department . " 

So they sent it in the mail. I got it 
back. It's all beat up. It's funny because I 
got my beeper back. I got my beeper back. Out 
of all that rubble and crap, I got a beeper back. 



M. MAZUR 24 

It's amazing, totally amazing. I was 
floored by that. I go, the system works. You 
figure thousands of people going around on the 
West Side Highway, thousands of people, trucks, 
and I got a beeper back. So the system works. 

You had some cop down there in the 
property room, and he called up. Very weird. 
There's a reason why we are the biggest and the 
greatest department going. You start thinking of 
more and more stuff as far as when we pulled up 
there, the debris that was there, and 
unfortunately the people. 

Fortunately I wanted to work really 
hard to take care of patients. That's the 
downside of it, the way that treatment area was 
set up, we were waiting for thousands of 
patients. They never came. If they arrived, 
they arrived on the other side. 

That's it. 
Q. Thank you. 
A. Thank you. 

MR. RADENBERG: The time is now 0721. 
The interview is concluded. 



File No. 9110119 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

LIEUTENANT GREGG HADALA 

Interview Date: October 19, 2001 



Transcribed by Elisabeth F. Nason 



G. HADALA 

MR. RADENBERG: Today is October 19, 2001. 

The time is 0558 eight hours. I'm Paul Radenberg 

of the Fire Department of the City of New York. 

Q. I'm conducting an interview with? 

A. Gregg Hadala, Lieutenant, EMS command, Shield 
387. 

Q. Of EMS Battalion 50. We are currently at EMS 
Battalion 50. This interview is regarding the events 
of September 11, 2001. Start with -- 

A. Okay, I was conditions 54 that morning, 
covering my regular area. We started hearing about a 
plane into the towers. I was with another unit on a 
call and we were listening on Department radios and the 
news radios, something was going on. I figured maybe a 
little plane, an accident and we found out it was much 
worse than that. I wasn't sent in on it. I was in the 
area. I was by -- sending messages that I could 
respond to that area, do you want to send me. I wanted 
to get a view so I went by 69 Street and Grand Avenue. 

You could see the whole tower was on fire and 
stuff, both towers were still up at that time. People 
were pulling over in their cars and looking at it and 
everybody's like in shock. I waited by 69 Street 
before I -- people were getting out of my way and 



G. HADALA 

stuff. I didn't even have my lights or anything, I was 
just driving regular and like everyone was like 
listening to their radios in their cars. They were 
sending the MERV-4 vehicle, that's the big bus 
outside. 

Finally after an hour they were sending it 
and I knew it would be hard for them to get by in the 
traffic and stuff, so I escorted, escorted them in to 
Manhattan, to get over there so then they put me on the 
job . 

We took Queens Boulevard -- we had to wait by 
BN . 45, between the LIE and Queens Boulevard over 
there. Rather than send them in, they said wait there 
for some reason. So all right. I escorted them over 
to Queens Boulevard to the 59 Street Bridge, over on 
57th Street, shot over to the west side, and then 
downtown. I was like -- traffic was clear. They 
closed all the access roads to emergency, you know, 
emergency vehicles, so it was a clear sailing down 
there and as we were going down, everybody is 
evacuating from lower downtown. All the people are 
walking up in their suits and stuff, some were dusty. 
It was like an end of the world thing. 

There was no direction really where we should 



G. HADALA 

go, where to set up. There were supervisors, officers, 
Chiefs, fire side, EMS side calling for help and like 
just cries for help. I think that's when the first 
tower went down. I figured that people were trapped, 
people were dying, were dead already. Let's see. 

I must have pulled up somewhere about 15 
minutes or so before the second tower came down. Came 
up the West Side Highway, past 23rd and 14th. There 
was like vehicles coming from all over. Staging. Some 
were going in, some were waiting. We wanted to get a 
little closer to treat patients, but not too close, so 
we wound up by Borough of Manhattan Community College, 
Chambers, a little past there. Not all the way to 
Vesey, but we could clearly see the tower in flames and 
stuff and a lot going on. 

Just trying to size up what's going on. We 
were basically, you know, had to make our own decisions 
because there was no upper command there telling us -- 
giving direction or anything. It was like that for the 
rest of the evening, so we had to do our best. So 
let's take a look, what's going on. And so we grabbed 
some people to see if there were any injuries, and 
treated wherever. While I was doing that, they said 
look out, look out and the second tower crumbled and 



G. HADALA 

the shock wave and debris came. I had the big bus with 
me and another truck, the equipment truck. There was 
one medic with us. 

Everybody took cover. Most of the people I 
was with, I didn't -- I was away from my vehicle. I 
was going to dive under a truck. It was a police truck 
and some guy was in it already. He said get in there. 
It's open. A Con Ed guy or something, so I rolled up 
the windows and the dust, the shock wave passed over. 
After a few minutes when the daylight came again, we 
got out and assisted anybody who wasn't able to take 
cover, and was covered with that stuff, and washed down 
some firefighters and police officers and EMS guys that 
were outside. 

Then we can go back in the debris area and 
see injuries and stuff. Then they made us evacuate 
that area, they said there's another explosion, or said 
there's a gas leak and made us all head up towards like 
14 Street. They told other units to go all the way up 
to 23 Street. Chelsea Piers. Apparently it became the 
staging area, so we got up to about 14th or so. I'm 
there, and you know, the big bus broke down so we had 
to clean her up a bit, because it got all dirty. 

We got back going again and I let command 



G. HADALA 

know that I was back in service, where we were, they 
told us to get over to another location. I think was 
probably near Vesey and Trinity, somewhere on the other 
side, I guess most of the injuries were. 

By the time they gave us that direction, came 
down, Chambers and a little past Chambers, I don't 
know. It might have been Barclay. We wound up stuck 
in traffic by another building where they had set up a 
hospital area. Whoever was in charge there just told 
us to park there and work with the docs and the nurses 
there. We were waiting for victims and stuff but they 
didn't come. We just treated some rescuers that got 
hurt trying to rescue, but we didn't get any more 
victims from the Trade Center. 

We remained there for several hours. Then 
that night they directed us over to the Battery Park 
City side. All these streets here. Just across the 
street from the towers, Ground Zero, whatever they call 
it now, and the apartment buildings. 

Q. Down around Albany and West? 

A. Yes, somewhere over there, close enough that, 
you know, if they pull anybody out or any rescuers get 
hurt, we're there to treat them. 

Q. Right. 



G. HADALA 

A. We were there till like about 5 in the 
morning. Washed down some guys, gave some oxygen. 
Finally were released 5 in the morning. They had set 
up some kind of command post on Chambers and West 
Street. There was an EMS Lieutenant and Captain 
there. I don't know where my vehicle is. I didn't 
know if it was still in one piece, whatever, you have 
to worry about de-conning it, whatever. They were 
like, yes, right. 

Then I mentioned some missing equipment and 
all that. They were just like, whatever, go to your 
vehicle, go back to your station, go home. There were 
firefighters, Battalion Chiefs, like, you know, needing 
rides back to the Bronx and Harlem. 

We were like full already. Just like -- I 
don't know -- maybe guys who lost their companies and 
stuff, they were just like, 6:00 in the morning. It 
was just like, you know, still just walking around. 
Got back, there were some extra personnel in the area. 
They de-conned the vehicles a little bit. That was 
it. Then we went back, you know, over time towards -- 

Q. Right. When you got in with the MERV to West 
and Chambers, do you know who else -- who was driving 
the MERV? 



G. HADALA 

A. Yes, it was EMT Short, Bobby Short. 

Q. Short. Recognize anybody else that was up 
there? 

A. A medic that came with them, Wilson 
DiBrianno. He had no partner or something, and was at 
the station and jumped on. 

Q. DiBrianno is from 50? 

A. Yes, yes. Also with us was the equipment 
truck guy, Mark Mazur. He drove LSU-4. 

Q. Right. Was there, when you got to Chambers 
and West, was there any other EMS staging or command 
area set up there or were you the first guys to get 
there? 

A. There was guys by 14 Street or so. I think 
we were like the first guys to push up towards Chambers 
Street and after it collapsed, all units came up, there 
was a couple of ambulances down there. Fire trucks 
from towns I didn't even recognize and ambulances. 

Q. Was there any other EMS officers? 

A. There was, yes, Lieutenant Pincus, and 
another guy, he is from Battalion 8. Another 
Lieutenant, a Spanish guy. I forgot his name, but he 
was in the area. Initially that's all I saw, no 
supervision. Later on after the collapse, I saw one of 



G. HADALA 

the Chiefs from our Division. 

One of the Chiefs, he was there. He was 
doing whatever he had to do, he checked on us. I told 
him the MERV was down. It wouldn't start. We were 
trying to get it back together. I don't know who 
else. I saw one of the new Captains. She used to be 
here, Janice. They were taking her away in an 
ambulance. She was hurt. Olsz -- 

Q. Janice Olszewski, something like that? 

A. Yes. I saw she was hurt, all covered in 
dust. She was stable. We were hearing things, this 
one is dead, this one is missing, that one is missing. 
Just frustration to see the tower on fire there and 
knowing that people are in there and rescuers went in. 
Firefighters, all those guys were in there. You know, 
when it collapsed, you said oh, man, it's like a lot of 
people just died. 

There wasn't a lot of patients to treat. It 
was just, with something like that you figured it would 
be in the hundreds, thousands of casualties. Either 
you made it out or you didn't. That night you had to 
drive all around lower Manhattan to get to the other 
side there. You'd go walking down by the graveyard, 
all those areas around Battery Park City were all 



10 

G. HADALA 



covered with that dust. 

Q. Any particular event that stands out in your 
mind for -- or struck you as odd or anything like that? 

A. Just actually the collapse and the sound it 
made. It was like a strange sound, rumbling, not the 
loudest thing you ever heard, not like a boom explosion 
type thing, but just strange. How fast it was 
collapsing, you just started running. Looking back and 
seeing all the pictures they got after and the videos 
they are showing over and over again. Pretty bad day. 

Q. Yes. All right. Any other thoughts or 
comments you would like to add? 

A. No, just as far as the medical staff was 
concerned. They were really not prepared, but nobody 
was. As far as like equipment, protective stuff, masks 
and stuff for the EMS crews, there was none after a 
while. The other stations, they had more stuff, that 
had no units involved. We didn't have much in the way 
of counseling and all that, checking on people's 
equipments and checking on us. You guys come down. 
It's like a month later finally seeing what happened, 
but we just felt that the EMS part could have been 
better organized and watched out for us a little 
better . 



11 

G. HADALA 



We are still waiting to hear about, you know, 
nobody went down for medicals or anything after. Some 
of us got sick. We were exposed to what we were and 
you fill out this exposure report, send it down and get 
no call backs. We don't even know if they got it or 
not. If anybody has got problems later, it ' s a concern 
that I have heard from our personnel. And equipment 
and what else to expect. Like what's the plan. If 
something else happens what is our plan. What do we 
do. Bioterror or whatever. We used to have special 
units to go in. HAZTAC trucks and stuff. 

Q. Right, ERS? 

A. Yes, I mean talk about bad timing. I think 
that should be back on-line. Working closer with the 
fire side. I mean, you know. Everybody has to work 
together and even closer, because our safety, our lives 
are at stake. I really don't see that happening, to 
the extent that I think it should. 

So the people who didn't make it and stuff, 
their families. They don't even know how many people 
were in the buildings and stuff. I don't think they'll 
ever know. I've just been like working in sectors, on 
overtime in the past weeks, just seeing very few whole 
bodies going out, pieces of people, shoes and clothing 



12 
G. HADALA 



with some bones inside. I never saw anything like 
that. 

Plus us police and firefighters on like 12 
hour different tours. And they have been pushing us 
for over five weeks to run an extra unit. RCC says 
extra units, and this and that. Like yesterday, they 
tell me go down to the Trade Center in the morning. 
There's not enough people on overtime so they pull 
people from the station; ambulances, EMTs, and 
supervisors. So I get down there and they said oh, you 
are cancelled. We don't need you. Go back on patrol. 

Two hours later they send me a message, 
report back down there. Went back to the city, and 
they called the command and Chief (inaudible) was in 
charge. Oh, what is he doing there. We don't need 
them now. Go back. You think a month later they would 
have it down how they want to do this. 

Take an overview and catch up on things, 
recognize things that go well and try to tool up the 
things that didn't go good as far as organizing us, 
helping us out. That's it. 

MR. RADENBERG: Okay. The time is now 0618. 
Interviewed is concluded. 



File No. 9110120 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

DOMINICK MAGGIORE 

Interview Date: October 19, 2001 



Transcribed by Maureen McCormick. 



MR. TAMBASCO: Today is October 19. I'm Mike 
Tambasco with the World Trade Center Task Force 
conducting an interview with Lieutenant Dominic 
Maggiore, EMS Battalion 50 in the kitchen of EMS 
Battalion 50. The time is 0640 a.m. 
Q. And Dom, if you would be good enough, tell us 
your story. 

A. I was at Employee Health Service when the 
first plane hit. I had just been cleared for full 
duty, because I was out with a broken toe. I was on 
modified duty for a couple of weeks when the first 
plane hit. 

As I was on my way back to Battalion 50 from 
BHS, I saw the second plane hit the towers from the 
BQE. I came back to Battalion 50, and I got in the 
command car with Lisa DeSena, one of the division ALS 
coordinators, and Paramedic Chris Lefkaditis, and we 
responded in. 

On the way in or around when we arrived at -- 
we first responded to the Staten Island ferry. Around 
the time that we first got there or on the way in, I'm 
not really sure, was when the first tower fell. When I 
got to the Staten Island ferry, there was one BLS unit 
there. Shortly after -- and I don't know which unit it 



DOMINICK MAGGIORE 

was in the confusion. 

Shortly after that, an ALS unit showed up, 
and we established the triage treatment area at the 
Staten Island ferry on the 2nd Floor of the ferry 
terminal. Communications was gone. Basically I used 
my cell phone to do all the -- most of the 
communication with citywide. 

We set up a triage treatment area. As we 
established the area, you know, more resources started 
showing up. Somewhere along the way -- awhile later, 
Chief Basile came and took command of that area. It 
was, I would say, at least an hour or two into it by 
the time -- you know, we established the staging area, 
and the units started to respond to us. 
Q. Right. 

A. Basically we treated very few patients. The 
area -- it was mass confusion, because that was the 
staging point for the evacuation of downtown, so it 
took a bit of time and energy to get the area set up. 

With that, we started getting voluntaries and 
volunteers, and we had probably 30, 40 beds set up, you 
know, with plenty of staff, medical staff doctors, and 
such . 

I would say a little while after we were 



DOMINICK MAGGIORE 

basically established, Dr. Cherson and Manny Delgado 
came in, and they get there shortly after the second 
tower fell, I think, because they were blown from the 
force of the tower falling. They were up there. 

I don't know time frames. I really can't 
tell. A little while after that, Chief Brown came in. 
We wound up treating and transporting Chief Brown, 
because he was in the rubble. 

A couple of hours into it, it was pretty 
obvious that we weren't getting too many patients at 
that location, and Lieutenant Phil Soto was up at the 
One Liberty Plaza screaming for help. He was right 
there. The rubble was -- actually, I got there, you 
know, a little while later. I took my command car and 
two medics that came with me, Lisa and Chris, and we 
went up to Liberty Plaza, and it was a mess. 

It was just -- the rubble from the tower was 
on the stairs, on the Trinity side of One Liberty 
Plaza. By that time it was starting to get dark. It 
was starting to get dusk. I don't know whether it was 
the dust, or it was starting to get dark or a 
combination of both. 

There were a bunch of basically volunteers. 
There were some Jersey units there, some private units 



DOMINICK MAGGIORE 

there. I know particularly there was a girl Chris from 
somewhere in New Jersey who kind of set up like the 
triage treatment area in the lobby of One Liberty 
Plaza, and by the way, she did an excellent job. 

When I got there -- Phil got there I guess a 
little bit before me, but he was more involved up on 
the rubble pile. I established the triage treatment. 
I, you know, kind of face-to-face with everybody. 
There was numerous doctors, numerous nurses, all 
volunteers. There were a bunch of people all over the 
place . 

I spent a lot of my time fighting with these 
people to keep them away from the pile, because I had 
some serious concerns about it being stable, which 
unfortunately, later on, proved to be true, because 
there was a secondary collapse, which I think wound up 
taking the lives of a couple of the Port Authority 
officers who were in the rubble. 

Somewhere during the course of the night -- I 
was there from daylight on Tuesday until about six 
o'clock, seven o'clock Wednesday morning, and 
somewhere -- during the course of the night, I had a 
problem with an Assist ambulance crew, that they 
were -- they had smuggled a reporter into ground zero 



DOMINICK MAGGIORE 

in the back of their ambulance. 

When I confronted them and tried to get some 
straight answers, they got a bit belligerent. So did 
the reporter, and I convinced him to leave the area. 

Back to the other part with the rubble. We 
had units operating close to the rubble pile and a 
couple of times on the rubble pile. Lieutenant Soto 
and I agreed that that was not a good situation, and we 
tried to get the attention -- we got the attention of 
the fire supervisors, and I think they kind of backed 
off to the edge of the rubble pile and were proceeding 
a little bit more cautiously. 

We pulled out I think about two or three more 
patients during the course of the evening. Dr. 
Gonzalez had shown up, because there was a bunch of 
problems, you know, with doctors staying off the pile, 
people, you know -- narcotics being sent to the front 
line, you know, via anyone who said that the doctor up 
front needed them. You know, there were a lot of 
problems like that. 

I spoke to a police -- I think he was an 
inspector, two-star inspector. I couldn't remember his 
name. I had issues with the Port Authority cops being 
up -- they were probably 30 yards into the rubble 



DOMINICK MAGGIORE 

climbing around, and shortly after that was when there 
was a secondary collapse. 

There was a Port Authority sergeant who came 
to our, you know, treatment area, and he requested some 
narcotics, the morphine, because either one or two of 
his officers were trapped, and he made statements to 
the effect that they were going to try and cut them 
out. He said he was a nurse. 

With that, two doctors who were at my staging 
area naturally volunteered to go up on the rubble, so 
the paramedic decided -- I advised the paramedic to 
send them to give him the narcotics, and they did. 

To my knowledge -- and I was there all 
night -- those officers never came to our staging 
area . 

It was just mayhem. I don't know how else to 
explain it. For the most part, our people and the 
volunteers, you know, they really did a really good 
job, a little bit unorganized, in my opinion. Like I 
said, unfortunately, I spent too much time -- I think I 
had to spend way too much time baby-sitting the doctors 
and nurses, volunteers. They really had no idea, no 
conception of command, and to the command -- they were 
all great and willing to help and all that kind of 



DOMINICK MAGGIORE 

stuff. 

As a matter of fact, the fact that there were 
no patients or very few patients contributed to 
everyone being anxious and mulling around and all that 
type of stuff, and it just kind of complicated things a 
bit more. 

What did get my attention, and the hair on my 
arm stands up as we talk about it, the people -- maybe 
not the higher-ranking, but the people who were down in 
the trenches -- cops, the firemen -- it was that they 
worked like they had worked together forever, like two 
good partners. They, you know -- for the most part, 
you know, listened to direction, you know, when it made 
sense, and anything you needed, people were right 
there, you know, hand in hand. 

The volunteers, the public were outstanding. 
Even that early on, there were people walking around, 
you know, giving out cold drinks, you know, all of that 
kind of stuff. It was -- it was what kept me going the 
whole time. 

I wound up being there from Tuesday morning 
until Friday, approximately 60 out of the 72 hours. I 
home because I 



DOMINICK MAGGIORE 



Back to that Tuesday night again, there was a 
secondary collapse, which I'm not sure, but in my 
opinion, and what I think happened, that's what wound 
up taking a couple of those Port Authority cops that 
were missing. 

Along with that, just in the mayhem to get 
away, we wound up treating three or four patients, just 
who got trampled, you know. You know, we had some 
problem with some organization. It's kind of 
difficult . 

First of all, just two lieutenants. Phil 
Soto spent most of his time up at the edge of the pile 
with a couple of crews. Again, we face to faced a 
couple of times. We tried to keep the personnel at the 
pile as minimal as we could. 

First of all, there were plenty of people. 
Second of all, nobody knew and it turned out hindsight 
is great, but there wound up being a secondary collapse 
a little bit later on the other side, which -- let me 
just kind of get a reference -- 
Q. The west side? 

A. I was at Trinity and Liberty. 
Q. Right. 



10 
DOMINICK MAGGIORE 



A. Somewhere over here. 

Q. North, up near -- 

A. Somewhere in this area. 

Q. Right, it would be towards -- 

A. Is that the northeast plaza building. 

Q. Yes, near West and Vesey. 

A. There was some kind of other -- another 
secondary collapse or something, because you heard the 
big crash, and everybody by that time now they are 
already -- everyone's on eggshells. Anytime you heard 
any kind of a -- whether it was a crane on the other 
side or anything that sounded like -- people were 
squirming and running. 

I wound up getting out of there Wednesday 
morning, like I said, somewhere around seven o'clock, 
six, seven. The time frame was fuzzy. I came home. I 
came back to the battalion. I wound up being treated 
at St. Joseph's ER, because my eyes were so severely 
irritated. I had bilateral abrasions. 

I went home for -- seemed like forever, but 
it turns out there was, like, a five-hour span between 
when I drove to Commack and got back here. I was back 
here by about 12 o'clock. 

As a matter of fact, Lisa and Chris were 



11 

DOMINICK MAGGIORE 



waiting for me and wanted to know what took me so long, 
and we headed right back in again. When I got there, 
Captain Boyle was there. I can't think of one of the 
doctors. There was a doctor from the Fire Department. 
He was involved with FEMA. Kind of a big guy, oriental 
or Hawaiian type. I don't remember his name. 

At that point, there was a triage treatment 
at Church and West at the Stuyvesant School. 
Q. Right. 

A. And at that point -- this is midday on 
Wednesday. It was still out of control. Narcotics and 
supplies were being sent up to the front line with 
civilians with a piece of masking tape on their shirt 
saying "EMT, " and sending, again, supplies and even 
narcotics until -- I think it was Dr. Gonzalez was 
there. He told me kind of get a grip on the situation 
at Stuyvesant School, see what's going on. I did. 

We set up security. We set up -- they pretty 
much had a treatment area set up. There was, you know, 
doctors, nurses. What wound up happening, with the 
help of Dr. Gonzalez, we put a stop to all the supplies 
going up to the front, first of all, without anyone we 
knew. We tried to get a grip on that. 

We set up security in the Stuyvesant 



12 
DOMINICK MAGGIORE 



building, because there was a couple of problems with 
reporters and cameras and all that kind of stuff. It 
got to the point where I had to get -- I don't know 
whether they were National Guard or whoever they 
were -- they were military -- to set up at all the 
entrances . 

We broke the teams, the doctors and nurses, 
into two, sent some of them upstairs to rest. There 
was a Dr. Rich Machette and a Nurse Jo. I don't even 
know -- who basically took control, and we brought -- 
one was as a leader for the day, one was the leader for 
the night. 

They pretty much took control of the medical 
staff and with me. We pretty much got a grip on it. I 
had a half a dozen masseuses show up, who were willing 
to -- and they set up shop, and they were giving out 
massages to, you know, anyone, just send them over. 

You know, guys had been there now for over 24 
hours, and they were great, and a medical staff -- 
there was probably two teams of maybe 20 to 30 doctors 
and nurses, and some -- you know, we mixed them with 
our people. 

Basically we had about six or eight, you 
know, stretchers set up, you know, for serious critical 



13 
DOMINICK MAGGIORE 



patients, and there was a doctor and at least one nurse 
and one EMT at each stretcher. We had an eye wash 
area, and they really set up. I just kind of, you 
know, got it flowing a little better, but this guy Rich 
Machette, this doctor, and this Nurse Jo really were 
outstanding, and that's when supplies started showing 
up from everywhere. 

I had a guy on a tractor trailer with 21 
pallets . Said, you know, he was told to come down 
here. I didn't have the need here. I sent him back up 
to Chelsea Pier. I took a little bit of -- it was 
gowns, and gloves and that kind of stuff. 

My main problem with the whole thing was the 
civilian medical people. I mean, doctors really had no 
idea. I had an anesthesiologist show up with a black 
bag full of drugs. I mean, like, you know, and he was 
going to anesthesize someone before he tubed them. He 
had no concept of the fact that our paramedics tube 
people all the time, and he really had -- I mean, he 
meant well. 

I wound up asking him to leave because he 
became such a nuisance, you know. We kind of set up 
with Rich and Joe, so that I wouldn't be bothered with 
every little nonsense, and the guy just got to be such 



14 
DOMINICK MAGGIORE 



a pain in the ass that I had to ask him to leave that 
we didn't need him. 

Similar with physical therapists. Everybody 
wanted to be in on all the conversations and all that, 
and I spent a lot of my time, you know, blocking and 
screening people who you really don't have time to 
explain. These doctors and such are so used to being 
in charge, and they had really no concept of the 
magnitude, or incident command at all. 

I think that should be something that someone 
should, in a general, or whatever or something to that 
effect, because I spent a lot of my time schmoozing 
doctors and trying to get them out of my way. 
Q. Right. 

A. I was there Wednesday until Thursday morning, 
eight o'clock or so Thursday morning. The whole time 
my radio was pretty much useless. I used my cell phone 
for most of the communications, and I lost that for 
awhile in between there. 

I had received a couple of calls during the 
course of the night because of my nine year old had a 
nightmare that I had been killed, and around then was 
when the news of Carlos Lillo started spreading around 
that he was missing. I broke him in when he started. 



15 
DOMINICK MAGGIORE 



He was a partner of mine. 

Anyway, by Thursday morning, I had to go home 
and take care of my son. He refused to go to school 
until he saw me, so I went home, and I took him to 
school, and I spoke to the counselors at the school, 
tried to get a couple of hours sleep. 

I came back. It was late Thursday, about 
four o'clock, somewhere around then. I was there 
Thursday, and I was basically with Captain Boyle 
helping him with logistics, and he was just exhausted 
so he went -- I don't know whether the ship was there 
yet or he went uptown to one of the hotels that were 
letting people sleep or whatever, and I kind of -- I 
was there with Chief Perrugia and Lieutenant Mann. 

At that time somewhere during the course of 
the night Thursday, I met a Chief Smith. There was a 
frantic rush because he had misplaced a piece of 
equipment on one of our gators, and he was frantic over 
it. You know, no one would elaborate over the radio 
what it was or whatever, and when I finally tracked it 
down, it turned out to be a Scott pack with a piece of 
the skull still attached to it, and wound up being 
Captain Amato's, from Squad 1, Scott pack. 

It was amazing to me. The chief was, like, 



16 
DOMINICK MAGGIORE 



frantic and upset and on the verge of tears and all 
that. When I finally -- I didn't know what it was, and 
when I -- he opened it up. I brought it to him. He 
opened it up. He looked at it, and he handed it back 
to me and told me what it was . 

By the time I, like, checked it out, and I 
was looking up to see how the chief was, because he was 
obviously upset and it was Chief Smith. He handed it 
over, and he did his job, and he was going back to 
work, and, you know, I had told him because when I 
brought him to the morgue, the morgue was, you know, 
barely set up (inaudible) and the marshals that were 
there, we kind of -- I kind of peeked over their 
shoulder while they were trying to figure out whose it 
was, the Squad 1 Position 1, which is the captain from 
Squad 1, and when I went back to at least give the 
chief some information, he was already gone back to 
work, you know, which was pretty moving. 

By that time it started raining during the 
course of the night between Thursday and Friday. To be 
honest, I was pretty disappointed in how the movement 
of our personnel went out, was seriously lacking, you 
know. We had an academy staff that was there for, 
like, 20 hours, waiting, like, four hours for a ride 



17 
DOMINICK MAGGIORE 



home, a ride out of there, and we couldn't effect it. 

In my opinion, a lot of the -- you know, I'm 
in charge, I'm in charge, started taking place, and at 
that point, I had to pull myself, because it was 
difficult for me to begin with. Naturally, my family 
was not happy that I was there, although they 
understood as best they could that's where I had to be, 
but when, you know, that ugly stuff started showing its 
face, I knew it was time for me to back out of there, 
and I wound up leaving there. When I finally got a bus 
to take the academy staff out, it was when I left, and 
I pulled out. 

Took a couple of days off, and I went back, 
and then I've been back there two weeks ago, and I went 
back a couple of days to work the morgue sector. I 
worked EMAP sector, and then the next week I was there 
for three more days, and now three or four weeks into 
it, and we still were not organized enough to get our 
people in and out of there in a reasonable fashion. 
Every day wound up being 16 hours, 17 hours. 

Q. Of a 12-hour tour? 

A. Right. Well, it was a regular tour for me. 
I went there on straight time. 

Q. Right. 



DOMINICK MAGGIORE 

A. So it wound up being 16 hours, 15 hours. 

Q. Right. 

A. It's just the people -- this is my own -- the 
public -- had it not been for the public, I couldn't 
have done it. You know, as much as there were these 
incidents of the isolated assholes who acted stupid and 
this kind of stuff, you know, that happens all the time 
unfortunately. It brings out the shit in people as 
much as it brings out the good in people. 

When I went back there Wednesday -- I was 
driving in -- West Street was lined, like, from the 
Chelsea Pier to, like, 59th Street where I came across 
town, or somewhere thereabouts, with the public. There 
were people walking around, you know, handing you 
sodas, handing you gloves, handing you cold drinks. 

If it were not for the public and their 
support, I probably would not have been able to do it. 
When I came home that Wednesday morning, my pharmacist 

-- and I live in Commack, which is you know, 45 
minutes from the city, you know, I explained to him, 
look, I need this prescription. It was for my eyes. 
If you can't do it right now, I have to leave, 
because -- he dropped what he was doing. He did it. 
Thursday when I went home for a couple of 



19 
DOMINICK MAGGIORE 



hours, I had seen my doctor because my feet were all 
screwed up. I broke a couple of toes. My feet were 
really bad. I wound up -- my doctor stopped in the 
middle of treating a patient, brought me in. He wound 
up giving me cortisone shots, because my feet were so 
screwed up. He wrote me scripts, called them in to the 
pharmacy, you know, and they are pretty far removed. 
They really didn't have to do all that, especially the 
doctor. He just like -- and that was -- that was far 
away. 

Saturday and Sunday I stayed home, and 
although I would have liked to have just relaxed, there 
was a steady flow at my house of neighbors, friends -- 
neighbors that I'm really not, you know, close with and 
stuff that knew I had been down there that had seen 
some pictures, and it made a difference. 
I think that's about my story. 
MR. TAMBASCO: All right, Dom. I thank you 

for your story. The interview concludes. It's 

7:09 a.m. Thanks again, Dom. 



File No. 9110121 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMT ROLAND DIAZ 
Interview Date: October 22, 2001 



R. DIAZ 

TAMBASCO: Today is October 22 nd . I'm Mike Tambasco with the 

World Trade Center Task Force, conducting an interview into the events of September 
11 th at the World Trade Center. Interview time is beginning at 8:08, and our interview 
today is with... 

ROLAND DIAZ : Roland Diaz Junior. 

Q: Roland, tell us your story. 

A: I remember on September 11 th , I was going to post when I got a call for a 
plane that hit the World Trade Center. Me and my partner started heading down there. 

Q: Who was your partner that day? 

A: Chris Attanasio. We started heading down there towards Manhattan. We 
were at the Bruckner Interchange when I saw the second plane hit the second tower. So, 
we're rushing down there, we're fighting traffic. We go on the FDR, we get off. We got 
there between 10-15 minutes. We started pulling up on Church Street. 

Q: Do you remember Church and what? 

A: Church and Vessey. 

Q: Great, 

A: That was the staging when we first got there. On our approach we saw 
bodies on the floor. We go talk to the commander. The commander tells us to start 
setting up, start heading in. As we started getting on our gear, the Lieutenant came out 
and told us that they're changing staging to West and Vessey. So we pull to West and 
Vessey. We get our stretcher out. We're getting our gear. We go down and start walking 



R. DIAZ 



towards the building. There was so many people there, everybody was running around. 
It was more a thing of people running around like a chicken without a head. So before I 
started to go, I had this need to call my Dad. When I picked up the phone to call my Dad 
to tell him bye, I was in building. ... 

Q: The North Building is One, the South Building is Two. 

A: No, I was in building Five. I went into the entrance, they also had another 
triage set up in there. I pick up the pay phone, call my dad, I finally get in touch with my 
Dad. People start running, yelling another plane hit the building. So, one side of the 
building was all glass, when I looked at it, my first reaction was to run down into the 
basement. But then in my head I said, that would have been the wrong thing, I would 
have been stuck down there. So I start running towards West Street within the building, 
so I guess I'm running West. I found an exit. Once I stepped out the exit, a cloud of 
smoke with debris, the minute I stepped out, overtook me. It was so much debris that if 
you put your hand in front of your face, you couldn't see it. I started coughing. At the 
same time, I'm still trying to get to West Street, away from the tragedy. Me and my 
partner, we meet up. This gentleman from OME, Operations Emergency Management. . . 

Q: OEM. 

A: Yeah, OEM for New York City comes up to me and my partner. He says 
my Lieutenant is still in there, I need somebody to take us. So me and my partner, 
adrenaline is still rushing, we go to the ambulance, which is full of debris. At that time 



R. DIAZ 



everybody is running in all directions cause they didn't know what was going on. All 
they knew was somebody yelled that second plane hit the building, and later they realized 
that the building collapsed. So we run back to the bus. Luckily the bus starts. The guy 
from Emergency Management jumped in the bus, we started heading back towards tower 
one. We opened up the doors. We got as close as possible. A fireman came up to us, he 
had lacerations to his face, he had burns, he had respiratory problems. Another 
gentleman came up to us, he had a pacemaker and he had chest pains. A handicapped 
woman, on TV they mentioned, not everyone had seen it about this guy who said he was 
helping this lady down the stairs who was handicapped, brought her down into the lobby, 
didn't know what happened to her, and was wondering if she was alive. I happened to 
be, me and partner, the ambulance that picked her up. Everybody ran to us. We put on 
our masks cause we kept breathing in, breathing in. We transported at least 6 to 7 people. 
Cause everybody ran in, we closed the doors, and we took them to, I think it's Cabrini 
Hospital. The one thing that I really remember. When we pulled up it was a ghost town. 
All you saw was dust. The building wasn't there anymore. Everybody's running in 
different directions. Everybody's trying to find each other. After that, my partner and I 
talked and listened to other peoples' stories, and basically that's it. 

Q: So you were already en route to the hospital when the second building 
came down then? 

A: Yeah, I was there when the first building collapsed. 



R. DIAZ 



Q: Well, is there anything else you'd like to add to this for posterity? 

A: Well, September 11 th will be a day that I'll never forget. You know, it 
made me a different person to realize how precious life is and it gave me different aspects 
of how I see things now. And to all the families that lost members, my deepest regrets to 
them. 

Q: Okay, well I thank you for your interview. This interview concludes at 
8:15 AM. 



File No. 9110122 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMT PETER CONSTANTINE 
Interview Date: October 22, 2001 



P. CONSTANTINE 



MIKE TAMBASCO: Today is October 22 nd , I'm Mike Tambasco 

assigned to the World Trade Center Task Force. I'm conducting an interview into the 
events of the morning of September 11 th at the World Trade Center. The time that the 
interview begins is 6:35 AM. The interview today is with EMT Peter Constantine of 
Battalion 20. Pete, just give me your name, ranks and assignment, then just tell me your 
story. 

PETER CONSTANTINE: Peter Constantine, EMT, Battalion 20. I usually get 
off at 8 in the morning. That day we had a late call. After the late call, we came back to 
the battalion, when we saw that the Trade Center was hit by a plane. We were assigned 
to go down. As we started heading down the West Side Highway, we saw the second 
plane, we saw both towers on fire. There was nobody on the West Side Highway after 
the second plane, just us and the police following each other down. We went straight 
through all the way down. We parked the ambulance with a lot of other ambulances on 
Vessey Street and West. We basically started grabbing equipment and helping out people 
who were running out from the building originally. At that time it was just chaos, 
everybody going everywhere. We were helping any way we could. A lot of people 
wanted to help. At that time, I don't know what time it was, we heard across the radio the 
tower's gonna fall, the tower's gonna fall. 

Q: You heard that on the radio? 



P. CONSTANTINE 

A: Oh yeah, it came across. And then all of a sudden, when you looked up, 
you froze for a couple of seconds, you saw these little pieces falling off. Then all of a 
sudden, everyone started to run. Then, you started to run, your helping people, helping 
them run. You saw it, it was amazing. . .like out of a movie, you know, the cloud's just 
chasing you. As you look back, you see it engulf people. After that was over, we all 
went back in. 

Q: Do you know about how far up you got before you went back? 

A: It had to have been a couple blocks. We also brought the ambulance too. 

Q: Oh, you took the ambulance with you? 

A: When we went back, and then we just started helping people. Everyone 
was covered in dust, everyone was breathing it in, we were trying to help them, cleaning 
them off, anybody injured. Basically at that point it was just a whole mess of people: a 
lot of EMS, a lot of Fire, a lot of Police, just everybody helping everybody, trying to do 
whatever you could, as much as you could in a fast amount of time. Mostly we were 
cleaning off the dust from your eyes and face. A couple of people needed to be 
transported, so we designated the busses to transport. Basically it was everybody trying 
to work together, get it together, cause it was chaotic too. And then, it felt like ten 
minutes, the other building fell. I read in the paper the next day that it was actually 
something like 30 minutes later that it fell. When that one fell everybody ran again. 

Q: You must have been right next to it then when that one came down, right? 
Cause that was the North Tower that came down second. 



P. CONSTANTINE 



A: We were close, but when we ran, we ran enough fast enough, that we 
weren't as overcome as other people. We got out. But we still got covered. Then when 
the other tower had fallen, it felt like ten minutes, but it was like you said, a half an hour. 
Everybody ran again, then there was a gas leak they said, they pushed everybody way 
back to 23 rd . So you had all these units, all these rescue people stationed at 23 rd street, 
and you couldn't do anything. That was the most frustrating part, cause you were there, 
and you were helping everybody but you couldn't go back to go get them. So you had to 
just sit there, cause those we our orders. We had to just sit there. Which was smart cause 
it was such an unsafe scene. That was basically it, we sat there for a couple of hours, 
everybody, not knowing what to do or how to help. Then eventually we started getting 
different assignments. Then they sent us home, we spent the night at — they set up 
quarters at the hospital, cause you couldn't go home. There were cars everywhere and 
they blocked you in. So me and my partner actually slept at the hospital in the dialysis 
unit that night. Then we came back, went back down, did a couple tours down there. It 
felt like we were actually doing something, helping when we went back down. It 
changed my life you know? I've only been on the job six months, and I saw something 
like that. 

Q: You won't see something like that again. 

A: I hope not. That's pretty much what happened that day. 



P. CONSTANTINE 

Q: Anything else you want to add to it? Go down into the history? 
Anything? 

A: It changed my life. I'm like, ready to get married and have kids. I don't 
know what's gonna happen. I'm too young though, I'm 23. 

Q: Okay Pete, thanks for the interview. We'll conclude the interview at 6:41. 

A: Thank you. 



File No. 9110123 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

EMT VINCENT MARQUEZ 

Interview Date: October 22, 2001 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



V. MARQUEZ 2 

MR. RADENBERG: Today is October 22, 
2001. I am Paul Radenberg of the Fire 
Department, City of New York, conducting an 
interview with -- 

EMT MARQUEZ: Vincent Marquez, EMT, 
Battalion 20. 

MR. RADENBERG: This interview is being 
conducted at EMS Battalion 20 regarding the 
events of the morning of September 11th, 
2001. The time now is 0855, beginning of 
the interview. 

Q. If you would start pretty much from 
when you were assigned to the job and how you got 
into lower Manhattan. 

A. Okay. Basically what I remember is 
that day I -- that morning I was off. I was at 
home. I was on the computer, and I had the TV 
on. I heard the TV say that there was an 
explosion at one of the towers. I thought it was 
internal. I really didn't pay much mind to it 
until the second plane hit and I heard the news 
reporter say, "Oh, my God." I know what's going 
on now. 

At which time I stared at the TV and 



V. MARQUEZ 3 

they showed the instant replay. When I saw the 
second plane hit, I immediately called the 
station. They asked me to come in. I came down, 
put on my uniform, and I grabbed Fermin. We 
jumped on a bus, and we were 2 Nora. 

I remember en route there was like a 
lot of confusion on the radio, and I heard 
somebody screaming "Mayday!" The dispatcher 
apparently didn't hear them. As soon as there 
was a break on the radio, I got on the radio and 
said, "20 Nora, somebody is calling a mayday." 
The dispatcher said, "Who is calling a mayday?" 
The guy kept saying, "Mayday! Mayday! Mayday!" 
All of a sudden it was just dead silence, at 
which time me and Fermin, we looked at each 
other. We were like, oh, my God. 

Anyway, when we got there, there was a 
lot of dust and debris just floating around. It 
was pretty hard to see maybe three, four feet in 
front of you. I jumped out of the ambulance, and 
I grabbed my bag and just started walking towards 
where I thought the smoke was coming from. 

I distinctly remember hearing somebody 
like whimpering, and I started make may way 



V. MARQUEZ 4 

towards that sound. I couldn't see, but I was 
following it from what I was hearing. All of a 
sudden there was like this roar. I remember 
stopping . 

It's funny because yesterday I was 
thinking about this and I remember Fermin 
screaming out my name and telling me to run. 
That's when I kind of like woke up. I turned 
around and just started running. As I started 
running, I looked behind me and there was this 
huge, black cloud just closing in on us. 

Once it pretty much settled, I went 
back with Fermin to where I thought I heard this 
whimpering coming from, and there was nothing but 
silence, this eerie silence. 

Fermin had the stretcher, and he was 
following me. I was pretty much just leading the 
way. We picked up people here and there, and we 
just started throwing people in the back of the 
ambulance. We dropped them off at Metropolitan 
Hospital and shot back. 

We went back into the area, pretty much 
ground zero. It seemed like a nuclear bomb had 
hit. There were vehicles abandoned at the light. 



V. MARQUEZ 5 

There were vehicles crashed into each other, 
vehicles on top of each other. I remember seeing 
firemen walking around in a daze. 

I think the second time around 
Fermin -- we got separated, and I met up with two 
guys from Battalion 17. I don't remember their 
names . They were out there doing the green ham 
thing. They had the EMS jackets with Green's 
name on it and stuff like that. They just 
grabbed whatever equipment they could and they 
just went out trying to find people. 

I remember looking into -- because all 
the cars, everything was covered with dust and 
debris. We were lifting things and walking by 
the cars and wiping the window to see if there 
was anybody in the cars, stuff like that. 

I think that what hurts the most is the 
fact that there was nobody to save. I don't 
know. I guess that's pretty much it, just trying 
to find somebody to save, but there was no one. 
Q. When you were going down, responding 
down there, do you remember what routes you took, 
what streets you were on once you got down there? 
A. I remember we went up Fifth Avenue, 



V. MARQUEZ 6 

because I remember seeing Central Park to my 
right. Once the park ended -- Fermin was 
driving, and he just started making twisting 
lefts and rights and stuff like that. So I 
really don't remember. I really don't remember 
where it was that he parked. 

I know that there was a couple of 
ambulances already there when we got there. But 
it's like the ambulances were a couple of blocks 
ahead, and everybody was where we were at. I 
found that -- I don't know, to myself I said why 
are they here. That's when I grabbed my gear and 
I just walked by everybody and just started 
walking towards the cloud. 

Q. Do you know was that still north of the 
Trade Center complex? 

A. I don't remember that. I don't 
remember that. 

Q. Aside from your partner, did you 
recognize anybody else that was down there? 

A. Kevin Darnowski. He's one of the 
paramedics here. I remember seeing him down 
there. I don't remember his name, but when I 
first got on the job we had -- I had a partner. 



V. MARQUEZ 7 

I used to work in Manhattan. I remember seeing 
him. I don't remember his name. 

I know that after all this -- after we 
finished looking and stuff like that, we went to 
the pier that was one of the triage areas. When 
I got there, that's when I -- 
Q. Chelsea Pier? 

A. Yeah, that's the pier that takes you to 
the ferry. 

When I got there, that's when I saw a 
lot of people from the station that I knew. They 
were there setting up triage and stuff like that. 

Yeah, that's it. That's all I 
remember . 

Q. Any other thoughts or comments you'd 
like to add? 

A. Yeah. I remember later that night I 
had gone to -- no, actually it was the second 
day, Wednesday. We had gone to actually where 
ground zero was at. I don't remember what it was 
that I needed, but whatever it was, it was at a 
makeshift morgue that they had. 

I remember just seeing big body bags 
with little lumps in them. At that point I 



V. MARQUEZ 8 

realized that those were body parts in there, not 
entire bodies. I remember when I looked to my 
left someone was putting a leg or a foot in a 
bag, and they were just starting to zipper it. I 
just felt helpless. 

I went down the 11th and the 12th. 
After that I didn't go back down anymore. When I 
realized that there was -- I think it was pretty 
much the second day, because myself, like 
everybody, was hoping that we could pull people 
out, there would be actually someone. But the 
second night I realized that there was no one to 
save, | 

That's pretty much it. After that it 
was lack of sleep, the nightmares, which I'm 
still having. 

That's pretty much it. That's what I 
can remember. 

MR. RADENBERG: Just for correction, on 
the start time of the interview was at 0850, 
and the time is now 0902 with the conclusion 
of the interview. 



File No. 9110124 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

EMS CHIEF JAMES MARTIN 

Interview Date: October 22, 2001 



Transcribed by Nancy Francis 



J. MARTIN 

MR. TAMBASCO: The date is October 22, 2002. 
I'm Mike Tambasco, assigned to the World Trade Center 
Task Force. We're in the office of chief J. P. Martin 
at Battalion 20 in the Bronx. The time is 0655 hours 
and we're conducting an interview into the events that 
chief Martin witnessed on September 11th at the World 
Trade Center. 

Q. Chief, if you'd be so good to tell us your 
story. 

A. On the morning of September 11th, I was at 
home. I was notified by my aide that a plane had 
crashed into the World Trade Center. Having responded 
in 1993 to the initial World Trade Center bombing, I 
was pretty convinced that we'd be responding in. 

I notified Citywide on the radio that I was 
available for response and awaited their dispatch not 
knowing what resources had been assigned already. 
About ten minutes after that I was advised to respond 
in. I called my aide back, advised him that we were 
rolling, that I would meet him at our Battalion, 53, 
and we would go in together from there. I got dressed, 
got in the response vehicle and responded in from 
home. I live in New Rochelle. 

We encountered terrific traffic delays on the 



J. MARTIN 

way in. We found a lot of civilian vehicles were 
stopped in the middle of the highway at high points on 
the roadway where you could see Manhattan to watch the 
towers burn. So we had difficulty getting in. But on 
the way in I tried to develop a response plan for EMS. 

I notified the Citywide dispatcher that, 
instead of responding directly to the site, that I 
would respond to the Brooklyn side of the Brooklyn 
Bridge and establish a casualty collection point, and I 
directed them to have all Brooklyn and Queens units 
respond to that location in lieu of responding directly 
into Manhattan and we would from that point funnel 
patients out from there utilizing the Manhattan 
ambulances to ferry patients across the bridge and go 
right out from there. Another chief, Ellen Scibelli, 
heard my request. She was only a few minutes out from 
there. She said she would respond to that location and 
she did so and started to establish this casualty 
collection point. 

Upon our arrival at that location, which was 
the intersection of Tillary and Adams Street, Ellen had 
already established the site. She had a number of 
ambulances there. She was also working with Lieutenant 
Joe Lugo. We noticed just hordes of people coming over 



J. MARTIN 

the Brooklyn Bridge covered in soot. I took a hydrant 
wrench from out of the trunk of the car and I opened up 
a couple of hydrants or I had a couple of hydrants 
opened so that people could decontaminate themselves at 
that location, and I got on the radio to try and 
establish radio contact with any other chief officers, 
EMS chief officers who were operating on the Manhattan 
side. 

There was no response at that point. No one 
came over the radio, there was no voice conversation, 
and you couldn't see from all the smoke, but that was 
the point, I believe, that the second tower had dropped 
at that point. Like I say, no one was answering the 
radio. 

I notified the Citywide dispatcher that I 
would assume command of the EMS operation until such 
time as they were able to contact any other chief 
officer, and I asked Citywide to do a roll call of EMS 
officers to determine who was operational and who was 
not. At that point I wasn't sure if people were alive 
or dead, and it was a very terrifying moment thinking 
that I had the responsibility for the EMS response to 
this incident. 

I also was very concerned about going over 



J. MARTIN 

the bridge knowing, of course, that two airplanes had 
struck, that it was an obvious terrorist incident at 
this point, was there anything else involved besides 
just aircraft, were there chemicals or biological or 
nuclear components to this that would have affected 
anyone operating on the other side, and I felt that it 
might be more prudent to run the operation from the 
Brooklyn side and just await confirmation that there 
were people operating on the Manhattan side. I didn't 
feel it was prudent to send further resources over the 
bridge if there was an inferno or if there was a higher 
risk going on on the Manhattan side. 

Several minutes later Chief John Peruggia 
came up on the radio. He said he was operational. I 
said do you want me to respond in to your location? He 
said yes and he gave me the intersection of Chambers 
Street and West to respond in to. 

I did so. I traveled directly across 
Chambers Street after crossing the Brooklyn Bridge and 
the roadway was littered with a couple of inches of 
white dust. It almost looked like you were traveling 
through a snowstorm. There was a very strong odor of 
smoke in the air. There were some people walking 
around with paper masks. 



J. MARTIN 

We found a group of ambulances at Church 
Street and Chambers Street and an EMS lieutenant from 
the South Bronx. I'll try and think of his name 
later. I asked him to try and organize those 
ambulances and write down who they were and we would 
contact him on the radio if we needed those resources. 
I continued driving westward across Chambers Street to 
West Street, where I met up with Chief Peruggia and 
Chief Kowalczyk, and from that point we began to 
regroup all of the EMS resources at that location. 

Within a short time, Chief McCracken 
appeared, Commissioner John Claire appeared, and we 
began developing a response plan for how we would 
manage the injured and we tried to regroup the officers 
who were there. Chief Basile came up. All of the 
officers who were there prior to my arrival were 
visibly shaken. They were really -- they were coping, 
but you could see that they were really visibly shaken 
by the incident. Kevin Howe, he's a lieutenant down at 
Lincoln, he was operating as safety officer. I believe 
he had responded in from home, and he was trying to 
ensure that people who were operating were operating in 
a safe environment and he was doing a real good job of 
that. 



J. MARTIN 

I stayed at the command post. Walter gave me 
the responsibility, Chief Kowalczyk gave me the 
responsibility of the communications officer, and one 
of the things that I had done prior to leaving the 
house, having responded the first time and realizing 
that we had limited resources, I filled the car up with 
several bottles of water and I brought my little 
portable radio charger. Knowing that the new 3500 
radios were out there but we didn't have chargers for 
them, I threw that in. So I felt that, if we could 
find 110 volts, we could at least keep the radios 
charged for the extent of the event. So I had that 
with us and we found a source and we kept just 
exchanging batteries through the course of the day. 

Between Chief Kowalczyk and I, we 
reestablished contact with all of the chief officers. 
He had all of the chief officers report in, regroup, 
briefed everyone on the operational plan, and he 
handled the planning component and I handled 
essentially the communications and the, I guess, the 
smaller scale directions for officers on scene and left 
the more major decisions to Chief Kowalczyk and Chief 
McCracken. 

I recall seeing Chief Gombo at the scene as 



J. MARTIN 

well. I did speak to Chief Villani on the radio. He 
was down at the South Ferry. Chief Friedman I spoke to 
on the radio. He was handling the Staten Island side. 
He was prepared down there to transfer numbers of 
patients from the ferry terminal in St. George to 
Staten Island hospitals. 

Chief Carrasquillo was also at the command 
post we had established at Chambers and West, and I had 
encouraged him to try and -- I gave him the number of 
my wife, who is a paramedic in New Jersey, and I gave 
him a number for their dispatch center to try and 
establish a casualty collection point on the Jersey 
side because I knew there were ferries going back and 
forth and we could coordinate with Jersey on 
distributing patients to Jersey hospitals. I don't 
know if that was ever accomplished or not. But I also 
know that we didn't see large numbers of patients. I 
think by the end of the day, we had only seen 100 or so 
patients, so all of the plans really were kind of 
unnecessary. People either walked away from it or they 
didn't, and those who did walk away sought out medical 
attention on their own. 

Can we pause this for a minute? 
Q. Sure. 



J. MARTIN 

(Pause) 
A. The lieutenant I was trying to think of who 
was standing by at the intersection of Church Street 
and Chambers Street was Eddie Piatt. He's normally 
assigned to Battalion 17. I had him collect the 
resources at that location. 

Later on in the day, Deputy Chief Larry 
Mittleman arrived at the command post. I shouldn't say 
later on. It was probably a half hour to an hour after 
I had established contact with Chief Peruggia and Chief 
Kowalczyk. I asked Chief Mittleman to go over to 
Church Street and Chambers Street and make contact with 
Lieutenant Piatt and determine what resources were at 
that location for deployment into the incident. 

I don't really recall much other detail about 
the response component. I remained on the scene and 
operated as the communications officer until about 2:00 
o'clock in the morning, when Chief Kowalczyk relieved 
me and asked me to come in the following day. 

I recall looking at the dust that had come 
down and spread itself out over the area, looking at 
the fibrous component and thinking it was probably all 
asbestos. We somehow acquired paper masks and we were 
utilizing those for the duration of the day, and the 



10 

J. MARTIN 



following day we had better masks to put on. 

I don't know. I can't think of too much else 
at this point. A lot of the day is a big blur. 

Q. Chief, anything else you'd like to add 
emotionwise, anything that you'd like to have recorded? 

A. Emotionally, it was probably the most 
terrifying day of my life, not knowing if we were going 
into an incident that we may not come back out of. I 
recall hearing loud noises during the course of the day 
and not knowing if it was -- knowing that they had 
stopped all commercial aviation and not knowing if this 
was another aircraft that had gotten through that was 
heading towards us, if it was friendly aircraft or if 
it was a building collapsing, and there was constant 
tension the whole day, on top of that the constant 
decision making, one after the other, the radio was 
going the whole time, people were asking for direction 
and we were giving out direction. 

Having responded, like I say, the first time, 
I was familiar with geography, so that I found was a 
tremendous aid, but it was very disorienting with the 
amount of debris in the roadway. You couldn't get 
through West Street, you couldn't get through Liberty 
Street, you couldn't get through Vesey Street, you 



11 

J. MARTIN 



couldn't get through Church Street. All the 
surrounding roadways had collapsed so that our access 
was very much impeded. 

The biggest problem was going north and 
south. You couldn't really go - - a lot of our 
resources were down South Ferry. We couldn't bring 
them north. Anything that would happen in the north we 
couldn't bring south. So we had to utilize some gators 
that we had brought in. There were some people who 
drove gators in from -- Tony DeGennaro, he's a 
paramedic out of Battalion 49, drove a gator from 
Elmhurst in. I don't know how he got there as quickly 
as he did. 

But the gators were a godsend. They were 
about the only thing that was able to move through 
there. I think we had the first gators on the scene 
and they remained the only vehicles that could get 
around the site at all. 

There were large numbers of volunteers that 
came to the scene and we tried to utilize them as best 
we could and keep our units available for the regular 
911 response, and we had a large number of them staged 
just up the block. 

I saw Chief Hart during the course of the day 



12 
J. MARTIN 



along with his aide. Actually, I saw him with Grace 
Cacciola, who is a lieutenant in the EMS Division 1. 
Chief Hart had had two near-death experiences. I think 
pretty much everyone who was there from the beginning 
had not just one but two near-death experiences and 
these people were visibly shaken. 

Chief Wells I saw later on during the course 
of the day. Chief Browne I did not see. I was told he 
was injured. There were reports that several people 
had been killed, several of the EMS officers, none of 
which, of course, turned out to be true, and all of 
this weighed heavily on us, but I think we still were 
able to make decisions, make prudent decisions, and 
make sure that all of our people were operating in as 
safe an environment as we could. 

I think certainly Chief Kowalczyk, who 
organized the operational component of it, I thought 
operated extremely well in spite of what he's gone 
through this year. He really deserves a tremendous 
amount of credit for the effort that he put in. 

I would say that's it. 

MR. TAMBASCO: All right, Chief. I thank you 
so much for your interview. Thank you. 

THE WITNESS: My pleasure. 



13 
J. MARTIN 



MR. TAMBASCO: This interview concludes at 
0717 hours. 



File No. 9110125 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

EMTD FERMIN MERRERO 

Interview Date: October 22, 2001 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



F. MERRERO 2 

MR. TAMBASCO: Today is October 22nd. 
I'm Mike Tambasco with the World Trade 
Center Task Force, conducting an interview 
into the events of September 11th at the 
World Trade Center. The interview start 
time is 0826 hours, and our interview today 
is with -- 

EMTD MARRERO: Fermin Marrero. 
MR. TAMBASCO: And your rank and 
assignment? 

EMTD MARRERO: I'm EMTD, I suppose it 
is. 

Q. If you would, tell us your story. 
A. Well, it was September 11th. I was at 
my girlfriend's house waiting for her to come 
back from taking my stepdaughter to school. I 
usually wake up at 5:30 in the morning to watch 
the news, but I had a three-day swing, so I just 
slept a little late. 

So when I wake up, the first thing I do 
is turn on the news. All of a sudden I was just 
stupefied. I started thinking about it. When it 
first happened, I said it could be some type of 
accident. I remember in 1946 a plane hit the 



F. MERRERO 3 

Empire State Building. 

Today you have ground control, you have 
satellites. But when the second plane hit, you 
know what's going on. Even though it was my day 
off, I jumped up. My girlfriend asked me where I 
was going. I said, "Honey, I've got to go." 

I reported here. It was a madhouse, 
people running up and down, people grabbing 
equipment, grabbing vehicles. Somebody said, "We 
don't know what we're supposed to do." I said, 
"I know what we're going to do. They're going to 
send me down there. As soon as somebody comes, 
one of my boys, Vinnie Marquez came in. Me and 
him went out. I went home and -- I left my 
bulletproof vest there. I picked it up, and we 
were gone. 

I want to tell you that when you go up 
on the Brooklyn Boulevard, you could see the 
World Trade Center burning. You could see both 
buildings. That's when we started praying. This 
has started to help me be strong and proper. 
Everything I did that day -- I know Vinnie is a 
good guy. He was in the military. 

When we got there, they told us to 



F. MERRERO 4 

report to Fulton and Broadway. We parked our 
vehicle. We ran into Lieutenant -- her name is 
Karen. She's an instructor. She's a paramedic 
now. Tolingo. 

Q. Tolingo, Janet, maybe? 

A. Janet. 

Q. Janet Olszewski? 

A. That's it, Janet. That's her. She's a 
good person, a good instructor. She said just 
get oxygen out and water. So I said okay. 

A lot of people were coming by, asking 
us for those masks, and we didn't have any. So 
we took sheets and we tore them into pieces and 
gave them to them. I started taking out the 
oxygen. Vinnie said, "I'm going down the block 
to see if anybody needs help and I'll bring them 
here." I said, "Okay. You do that." 

Like ten minutes into that, right there 
at Fulton and Broadway, I hear this rumbling. 
Everybody is looking up in the sky. I said, oh, 
man. Really I didn't know the first tower is 
already down. Then everybody starts running. I 
said, no, this can't be. Everybody is looking to 
see where it's coming from. We started running. 



F. MERRERO 5 

Then I said I need to find my partner. 
That's when the smoke came zooming. It's 
indescribable. It's like as you see on TV when 
they're in an avalanche. It just came zooming 
out. It's like when you have pressure and 
everyone is running. 

I said, oh, my God, my partner. I 
started running toward him. There was a point 
there that there was no visibility. It was 
black. It was hard to believe. It's like 
9-something in the morning, 9:30 in the morning, 
and the sun hasn't gotten directly above, but 
(inaudible) . 

So I'm running toward my ambulance, and 
he comes. I grab him. I said, "Get in the 
ambulance, and let's move further up." I turned 
on my lights, my sirens, my high beams. I move a 
foot when this other ambulance comes out of 
nowhere. It says something Valley Hudson, a 
volunteer. I would have hit him or he would have 
hit me, really. 

Then a guy said the second tower is 
down. I didn't know the first tower is down. 
It's impossible. It's impossible. I really said 



F. MERRERO 6 

that. I said, "This can't be. Here in New York, 
we (inaudible)." I said, "Let's bring the bus 
down as far as we can, bring out the stretcher 
and see what we're going to do." 

So we brought down the stretcher, put 
all the oxygen on it. We did a favor we 
shouldn't have, (inaudible) the Port Authority. 
You know what I mean? 

We started going down the block, and we 
ran into an old man and this guy that had a 
laceration on his arm. Vinnie took care of that. 
I took care of the old man. We didn't hardly do 
anything. So I find the police (inaudible). 
Yeah, here's two guys over here with some badges. 
I said take them, put them in the back. We 
didn't know we were going to be staying for a 
long time. I didn't have coffee that morning. 

Then we come out with the stretcher, 
and these people were carrying this fireman. 

Q. Do you know about where you were then? 
A. Yeah. We were right here. Here's 
Fulton and Cedar, Broadway. Me and Vinnie came 
down to here. 

Q. So you went south on Broadway? 



F. MERRERO 7 

A. Yeah, we went south on Broadway, almost 
to Wall Street. This is the bank here, I think. 
It was in this area here. 

Q. Right around near 140 Broadway? 

A. Right. We went all the way back up. 
Then we came down. We stopped over here in this 
area here. 

Q. Right near City Hall? 

A. Right, we were around City Hall, 
because they told us there was a fireman hurt 
there -- a policeman hurt. So this is where we 
went. I took care of him. 

Then we came back through here. Right 
here is a bank. In the bank we found this lady 
who was hysterical. She was really breathing. 
She was upset. She was breathing. I said, 
"Vinnie, we've got to leave her." 

So we came back down. At this point I 
went and got the ambulance and brought it down to 
here, right up to here. 

Q. Back to like Broadway and Fulton? 

A. Right. Then we found this fireman -- 
no, I think that's where we ran into some of our 
boys, Charlie from station 50. I forget his last 



F. MERRERO 8 

name. He was right there on Kings Bridge and 
Reservoir. And a medic. So we took him with us. 

So then we decided that we were going 
to have to go back to the ferry. We went to the 
ferry. That's where we ran into Juan Burgo, Mike 
Negron, Charlie and the medic. I said, "Look, 
we're going back out. We ain't staying here." 

So we come back down over there, and 
we ' re on Trinity - - 

Q. You came north on Trinity? 
A. We came back north on Trinity. Right 
around here they stopped us, and they had this 
old man with a pacemaker having chest pains. 

Let me tell you something, it was 
nothing about ego. Nobody was in charge. I know 
what they teach you at the academy about we're 
going to triage, we're going to do this, we're 
going to do that. One thing about it, everybody 
kept their head. Everybody worked as a team. 

I said, Charlie, why don't you take 02 
and stay with the old man. We're going to go 
straight up Trinity. Whatever we find, we'll 
come back down and pick you up with the old man 
and take him to the ferry. He said that's cool. 



F. MERRERO 9 

So he jumped out. When we got right 
around here, we found this fireman. 

Q. That's around Cedar Street? 

A. Yeah, right around Cedar, right here. 
Right here, in fact. 

Q. Trinity and Cedar? 

A. Trinity and Cedar. We find this 
fireman. He's like in shock. I'm 48, and I 
think I look pretty good. He said he was 48, but 
he looked like he was sixty that day. I'm 
telling you, he was walking around aimlessly. I 
said, "Come here, come here, come here. What's 
wrong?" He said, "Nothing. Get off of me." I 
said, "Are you okay?" He said, "I'm okay, just 
having a little chest pain." "Come with us. 
We'll take your blood pressure and give you some 
oxygen. That'll make you feel better." 

So we walked him back up to the 
ambulance, and we put him in the ambulance and we 
went straight back down to right over here as far 
as we can go. We asked if anybody needed help. 
I said all we've got is our patient here. We're 
going to treat him. We went back to Cedar. We 
got up to here. 



F. MERRERO 10 

Q. To about Cortlandt Street? 
A. Cortlandt Street, yeah. 

Then that's it. Then we stood there 
and we looked at it. The metal part sticking up 
looked like a crown. I was going to walk in 
there, but Vinnie said don't go in there, it 
looks like it's gonna fall. I said, "Let's get 
the fireman and the old man out of here." 

So we came back, picked up Charlie and 
the old man, and we came up to like -- by the 
exchange. I came across -- 

Q. And then went down Broadway? 
A. No, no, we came across the exchange, 
and over here we ran into a lieutenant. "You can 
take them to Metropolitan." There was so much 
madness that we went up Broadway, kept on going. 
We kept on going up Broadway past all this 
madness. 

Then we got across to Canal Street, we 
found this African-American lady on the ground. 
I think she was (inaudible). They stopped us. I 
said let's go on in there. 

It was really funny, the fireman said, 
"I want to smoke a cigarette." I said, "Pop, 



F. MERRERO 11 

with all this shit, you want to smoke?" He said, 
"Listen, son." "But you have chest pain." "That 
building fell five feet away from me." I said, 
"You ain't going to die today, boy. You better 
smoke two of them. " 

So we took him in the ambulance, and 
then we had the lady. I stopped again. Then 
they brought this oriental gentleman. So help me 
God, he was covered, he was white; from head to 
toe, white he had a gash on his forehead. We 
threw him in there, gave triage to everybody. 

We let the other guys off, let them 
could go back and help. We zoomed all the way to 
Metropolitan. The eeriest feeling in the world 
is to be on that highway and there be nobody else 
there but you. 

We got to Metropolitan. We dropped 
everybody off. I took a broom. I swept the 
whole ambulance real quick of debris. We went up 
to Harlem to get another stretcher, but that was 
a bad move. So we had to come back all the way 
around the way we did, and go all the way back 
down around. 

Then we went back to Liberty and Cedar, 



F. MERRERO 12 

and that's where we picked up Juan again and 
Charlie, the other medic, and Mike Negron. We 
went back up there hunting, so to speak, and we 
found four more people and we took them to the 
hospital. 

Then by that time the sun was like 
overhead, like 12:00. You don't have any sense 
of time. My dogs are killing me. My dogs are 
killing me for two weeks. I have some things for 
my feet now. Really, I'm telling you, they're 
killing me for two weeks. I have to write a 
letter about that. 

In all that madness, everybody kept 
their head. When we got there, when the sun was 
really out, then we saw -- let me tell you 
something, you can't beat a New Yorker in a 
pinch. I don't care what you say about this 
city. You can't beat a New Yorker in a pinch. 

The guy from McDonald's -- McDonald's 
opened. He was giving out cheese sandwiches; he 
was giving out coffee. By this time -- we were 
out at 9:30. I woke up at -- the first building 
had been struck, and I was there to see the 
second building get hit from my house. I was all 



F. MERRERO 13 

the way down there at 9:30. 

The thing is, there were people out 
there giving us food, giving us water. You don't 
think about it, but by that time I was like -- by 
2:00 I was already beat. 

We ran into this lieutenant. I forget 
his name. He had a whole bunch of people. So we 
went back to the World Trade Center -- I mean 
to -- 

Q. The ferry terminal? 
A. -- the ferry terminal, told the 
lieutenant. We came back, but we couldn't find 
him. So we assumed somebody else picked him up 
and took him to where he had to go. 

After that it was just like cut and 
dry. I can't say it was humdrum, because there 
was nothing humdrum about this. I got enough and 
I was working with a lot of good guys, Vinnie 
Marquez, Juan Burgo, Mike Negron. Charlie, I'm 
going to forget his last name, the medic, from 
Station 50. 

Chief Basile was there. There was a 
point I said, "Chief, we can't stay because 
there's a lieutenant stuck up there and we know 



F. MERRERO 14 

where we're going." He just said, "Go, go." He 
didn't hold us back. 

All that soot and stuff I breathed in. 
It's been bothering me ever since then. They 
told me I could go down there. They have 
medicine for you down there. I don't know. 

It was also everybody. Even just a 
month later, I had to go away for like nine days 
to get myself together. I had a knee operation, 
so I just took nine days of R&R. 

Other than that, you know, it was a 
horrible experience, but like I said, you can't 
beat a New Yorker in a pinch. I pray to God it 
never happens again, that we have to go through 
this again. 

That's it. 
Q. Anything else you want to add? 
A. Outside of my dogs, my feet. Oh, and I 
lost an ambulance, but I brought back the de-fib. 
I want that for the record. Thank you so much. 

MR. TAMBASCO: The interview concludes 
at 0840 hours. 



File No. 9110126 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

EMT JOSEPH HENDERSON 

Interview Date: October 22, 2001 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



J. HENDERSON 2 

MR. RADENBERG: Today is October 22nd, 
2001. I am Paul Radenberg of the Fire 
Department, City of New York. The time is 
now 0814 hours. I'm conducting an interview 
with -- 

EMT HENDERSON: Henderson, Joseph, EMT, 
at Battalion 20. 

MR. RADENBERG: This interview is being 
conducted at EMS Battalion 20. This 
interview is regarding the events of the 
morning of September 11th, 2001. 
Q. You can pretty much start with when you 

were assigned to the job. 

A. I was assigned to the job approximately 

8:30. We took the Bruckner to the -- I forget 

the name of it, the other highway to get into 

Manhattan. 

Q. On the east side, the FDR? 

A. Yeah, FDR, but the toll you pay before 

you reach the FDR. Anyway, FDR. There was heavy 

traffic, a lot of police cars, a lot of FBI cars. 

Traffic was finally clearing all the way down. 

We parked right across the street from Two World 

Trade Center. 



J. HENDERSON 3 

Q. On the West Side Highway? 

A. Yeah, on the West Side Highway. 

Q. Just south of Liberty? 

A. Yeah. 

There were body parts all over the 
place. When we were going there, you could see 
the buildings on fire. When we pulled up, a lot 
of people were screaming, people running in and 
out of the buildings. 

We were directed where to park. We 
parked, and we went to help two other medics. 
Then when we were coming back, we went to go to 
the staging area when somebody started screaming 
that the building was falling. 

I looked up, because I went back to the 
bus to get the long board while my partner was 
waiting for me. I looked up, see all the debris, 
you hear the rumble coming down. I don't know 
which direction I took off to go. I took off 
from like this way. 

As I was running, you feel a bunch of 
debris hit you and knock you down. After I got 
up, you couldn't see where you were going. You 
had a bunch of people screaming. A few of the 



J. HENDERSON 4 

ambulances were exploding. You felt debris 
hitting you, choking, couldn't breathe, walking 
around, it seemed like forever. 

Finally I was able to get inside of an 
ambulance that the lights on. We stayed there 
for a few minutes. But there was so much debris 
and stuff that you could hear hit the buses and 
stuff, like stuff was crashing on the bus around 
you. So we were able to get out. 

There was a building on the side that 
we were able to go into. We stayed there for, I 
don't know, a certain amount of time. A female 
cop came running in and said, "One of your guys 
is on fire. One of your guys is on fire." When 
we came back out, that's when the second building 
collapsed. We were able to run from that one 
because we weren't too close to that. 

I hung around there for --we couldn't 
get to the other side and couldn't get back 
nowhere. We had no radios. We lost our radios. 
We lost everything. Somebody from the news was 
down there. 

After a while we were able to get a bus 
to take us to Berkley Hospital, and from there we 



J. HENDERSON 5 

were taken to the Bronx. 

Q. When you were down here on west side 
and Liberty, do you remember seeing any other EMS 
people down there that you recognized, know their 
names? 

A. Yeah, Jefferson. Jefferson was down 
there. He's a medic. 

Q. Is he from Battalion 20? 

A. No, I forget the station he's from. I 
think he's from Boston outpost. 

Q. Do you know who he was working with? 

A. No, I don't know who his partner was. 

Q. What vehicle number did you use that 
day; do you remember? 

A. I believe it was 265. 

Q. 265? 

A. Yeah. 

Q. When you got down there, that was 
between the two crashes? 

A. No, it was after the second crash. 

Q. After the second crash. Okay. 
Was Jefferson -- 

A. He was there before me. 

Q. He was one of the two medics that you 



J. HENDERSON 6 

said you guys were helping out? 

A. Yeah, we went to help him at first. He 
was there before. Actually they pulled up right 
before us. We were behind them. When they 
parked, they jumped out. They were told we had a 
firefighter with a crushed face. They ran to the 
side, and we parked like right in front of them, 
because they were directed to pull in front. 

Then we went to help them. Then still 
we had to go and build the staging area. 

Q. Right. 

A. When we were going there, that's when 
everything started to crumble. 

Q. Do you know where they were treating 
their patient at that point? 

A. It was Cedar. 

Q. Over on Cedar? 

A. Yeah. It was there. I can't 
remember -- they were pulling the firefighter out 
from somewhere; I can't remember where. It was 
almost black. 

Q. Where was the staging that you were 
directed to? 

A. The staging was on, I believe here. 



J. HENDERSON 7 

Q. On West? 

A. In the hotel. 

Q. In the hotel? 

A. Yeah. 

Q. Did you recognize anybody in there? 

A. We never made it to there. 

Q. You never made it? 

A. No. We got to about the middle of the 
street, and that's when we heard the rumble, 
people started screaming that it's falling, and I 
ran this way. I'm not sure which way my partner 
ran. 

Q. Was it between the collapse of the two 
towers that you actually were treating the 
patient? You said something about a burn 
patient . 

A. We never actually got a patient. 

Q. No? 

A. No. 

Q. After the collapse of the first 
building -- 

A. Oh, yeah, the burn patient was after 
the collapse of the first building, when the 
female cop that ran into the building we were in. 



J. HENDERSON 



8 



I believe it was this one. I don't know what 
building this was. 

Q. You were down here at Albany and West 
Side Highway? 

A. Yeah, after the first collapse. I was 
able to get in an ambulance. We were able to get 
out because everything here was being crushed. A 
few of the ambulances were on fire. You could 
hear some of them exploding. 

So after we got out of the ambulance, 
we ran to one of these buildings. Then after we 
came back out, we got about this far, and then 
that's when the second building collapsed. 

Q. So somewhere between Albany and 
Carlisle was the building that you went into. 

A. Yeah. 

Q. And got back up to about Albany Street? 

A. Yeah. 

Q. And that's when the cop -- 

A. No. She came in the building. 

Q. She came in the building? 

A. Yeah. When we went back out, that's 
when the second building collapsed. 

Q. Do you know where the burn patient was 



J. HENDERSON 



that she was talking about? 

A. No, no. I believe she said he was in a 
bus. He was still one of these buses. 

Q. He was in an ambulance? 

A. Yeah, but we never got to him. 

Q. Your vehicle, 265, was that destroyed? 

A. Totally. 

Q. That was? 

A. Totally destroyed. 

Q. Do you remember any other EMS vehicles 
over there? 

A. There was a bunch of them. I don't 
remember the numbers. 

Q. Okay. 

A. But it was like an average of eight 
buses parked at an angle, because we would just 
jump out, run in the building, and they would 
like come back. It was easy access in and out. 

Q. Right. 

A. There were about eight ambulances. We 
were in the front, because there were other 
ambulances there before we got there. 

Q. After the second tower came down, what 
did you do then? 



J. HENDERSON 10 

A. Then I came out, looking to see if you 
see anybody that you know or contact anybody. 
Then it was a few of us that had hung together. 
It was me, Jefferson. I can't remember the other 
medic's name. We were just waiting around to see 
if maybe somebody would come get us. We had no 
radios. We couldn't call anybody. That's it. 
We were just waiting. 

After a while a chief came up -- I 
can't remember his name -- and told us wait here, 
they'll send somebody to come get us. We waited. 
Nobody ever came back. Finally we got a lift to 
the hospital. 

Q. Lonnie Penn was your partner that day? 

A. Yeah. 

Q. Do you know where -- 

A. Yeah, from what I heard, he ran this 
way to the water, and at that time there were a 
few guys there that had boats and they took him 
to Jersey. 

Q. So you pretty much didn't meet up with 
him again? 

A. Until 10:00. 

Q. Back up here at the building? 



J. HENDERSON 11 

A. Yeah. 

Q. Any other thoughts or opinions you'd 
like to add? 

A. There was another guy that was running 
with me. I don't remember his name. He was 
messed up pretty bad. I think they said one of 
the guys that was in the hospital, he had a 
punctured liver. But he had a hole in his back 
and a broken wrist and he was running. 

Q. Was he from EMS? 

A. Yeah, he was from EMS. 

Q. Yeah? 

A. Yeah. But I'm not sure what station. 
We were in the bus -- the same bus that we were 
in, we got him in. We were going to start to 
treat him, but there was just so much stuff 
falling. We took him out. That's when we took 
him in this building. After the first smoke 
cleared, some people took him out. That's when 
we came back out. That's when the second 
building collapsed. 

Q. Okay. That's pretty much it, and I 
thank you. 

MR. RADENBERG: The time is now 8:25. 



J. HENDERSON 12 



The interview is concluded, 



File No. 9110127 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMT ALWISH MONCHERRY 
Interview Date: October 22, 2001 



A. MONCHERRY 

CHRISTOPHER ECCLESTON: Today's date is October 22, 2001. The time 
is 22:12, and my Name is Christopher Eccleston of the New York City Fire Department 
World Trade Center Task Force, I am conducting an interview with the following 
individual... please state your name, title, and assigned command area of the Fire 
Department of the City of New York regarding the events of September 11 th , 2001. 

ALWISH MONCHERRY: My name is Alwish Moncherry, I am an EMT with 
the Fire Department of New York, I work out of Battalion 49 in Astoria. 

Q: Were you assigned to the World Trade Center disaster on September 11 th , 
2001? 

A: Yes, I was. 

Q: Can you please tell me in your own words about the events of that day? 

A: Of the events on September 11 th , I would say it would have been about 
8:30 or so (I'm not too sure about the time) I was at my 89 when we received the call. At 
first I heard over the radio, the towers had been hit. I didn't know what it was, I didn't 
think anything of it for a split second. Well, my partner didn't think anything of it, but 
then I told him, cause Kevin Barrett was my partner. 

Q: Kevin Barrett? 

A: I said Kevin, did you hear that on the radio? He said: hear what? Then I 
told him something happened at the tower. Next thing you know, five or ten seconds 
later, 9 Henry respond, please respond to the World Trade Center. Immediately we 
picked up and went. We didn't have time to write anything. Down 21 st street, we 



A. MONCHERRY 

reached the 59 th street bridge. Central tells us to stand by at the 59 th street bridge on the 
Queens side, until further notice. We're the first ones there, the other units 49 Charlie, 45 
Adam, and 49 Victor were also called. I think all of the units out of this station were 
called. We were at the front of the line, 49 Henry, to wait for conditions 49 to show up 
and tell us where to go. Everything's happening really fast. I'm looking from the 59 th 
street bridge, you can see the towers, you can see the smoke. The buildings just look like 
a cigarette basically. When we get the call to go over the bridge (I'm not too sure about 
the time) when we're on the bridge there's plenty of traffic. That's when we noticed the 
second plane hitting tower two. I just couldn't believe that that happened. So everybody 
was just trying to get there as fast as possible, as soon as possible, no matter what. A lot 
of fender benders en route, not us, but a lot of other cars hitting. A lot of chaos on the 
highway, on the bridge. Finally we get over, and we head down to the staging area. I'm 
not too sure, it was a Lieutenant or captain at the staging told us~cause 9 Henry is a haz- 
tac unit, I guess they wanted them at a certain place. They chose to put us originally on 
Vessey and West. 

Q: Can you just indicate on the map with a number 1 where your vehicle was 
parked originally? 

A: On the corner of Vessey and West. While on that corner, I'm seeing 
people rushing out of the buildings. Most of them appeared to be burns and, it was just 
hell. I can't really describe it. People were just pouring out. Thousands and thousands 
of people just coming out. And everybody seemed to have been injured in one way or 



A. MONCHERRY 

another. Triaging patients, that's all we could do. We didn't have enough triage tags for 
everybody either. At the moment prior to the first building collapsing, I remember 
hearing popping sounds. One of my partners was saying what's that? I saw the people 
falling and exploding on the ground. 

Q: What was exploding on the ground? 

A: Human beings. They were just falling from the sky and exploding like 
that. 

Q: How close were you to these people landing? 

A: I would say about 100-150 feet. People coming out of the buildings half 
burned, the fuel must have spewed down and hit some people. A lot of burns literally 
down through the skin to the bone. I had two patients on my ambulance, vehicle 111. 
FBI Agents were telling us to move our vehicle from the corner of Vessey and West, 
cause there was debris from the airplane which they needed for evidence. I guess it was 
NTSB, they wanted the area secured. There was nowhere for us to move the vehicle, 
cause there was debris everywhere. I know I ran over some sort of evidence somewhere. 
Pieces of metal from the plane. I tried, we moved it. I think now I was closer to the 
building, I would say about 50 feet from the building prior to it falling. 

Q: Can you indicate on the map with a number 2 where you parked your 
vehicle the second time? If you can recall. 

A: Let's see... here. 

Q: Thank you. 



A. MONCHERRY 



A: When this happened, the first tower starts to collapse. I didn't know this 
at first. My partner was on the corner, I didn't know his location at the time, cause I'm 
triaging. I have two people on my ambulance already. To my assumption, I thought, 49 
Henry is a haz-tac, it's supposed to be there for a reason. I'm not haz-mat certified, but 
my partner is. All I had to do was triaging the patients. My first patient was going into 
shock and bleeding profusely. My second patient was an asthma patient, and her ankle 
and knee were messed up a little bit, but she was okay. I took care of her and she was 
okay after that. So I left the two of them in the ambulance and stepped out. Two other 
guys needed help, I'm not sure which unit they were. They needed some help to put the 
patient on the long board. As we're lifting her up, I notice people rushing towards us, 
and when I look up, I see the building coming down. It's almost hovering over my head 
in slow-motion. I'm like holy — you know. 

Q: You can say what you want, it's fine. 

A: I just, I froze for awhile. I looked up and I couldn't believe when it started 
coming down. It was a decision that I knew I had to make, but it took awhile for me to 
do it. The building's coming down real fast, and it looks like slow motion. I had to 
leave. I turned around and I had to go. If I would have stayed and ran back to the 
ambulance, I don't know what would have happened. So as far as I know the people who 
were within that vicinity there, if they ran the wrong way, turned the wrong way, if they 



A. MONCHERRY 
looked the wrong way, something could have either fell on them at that moment, or after 
a long time, from all the debris piling up, they would have been dead. Definitely. So I 
just ran. I turned around, I thought about my kids. My daughter, 5 years old, Imani. And 
my son, brand new to the world, one month old. And my wife, we just got married in 
August. I thought about them and I said I can't leave them. I turned around and started 
running. On my way running, I found a lot of people, and I helped out a few that I knew 
needed help. If they could run, just run with me. Just keep on going. Now it's like a 
dead silence, it's still clear, but it's a dead silence. And soon all you could see was a 
black smoke coming from all sides of the street. It hit me in the back, it hit everyone, it 
just blanketed us. No one knew what to do, we couldn't breathe. I didn't have a mask 
on, we didn't have time to get all that stuff. While I was running, my helmet flew off, my 
mask, radio. I found radios, I found another helmet that was lying around, I picked it up 
and put it on. I feel some lady grabbing my arm, we're trying to run. She tells me she 
has asthma. I say just hold on to me, keep going. In the dark I saw a light. I started 
going towards the light. Holding the girl's hand, we're just going forward. We get to the 
light, it's another EMT. ... 

Q: We're gonna stop the tape for a moment, the time is 22:25. . ..Resuming 
the tape at 22:26. 

A: Well, I'm holding the girl's hand, it's dark. I can't breathe, I can't see 
anything. All you hear is voices, everyone screaming and yelling for help. I saw the 
light and I started going towards the light. It's a fellow EMT, I don't know his name. All 
I know is he had dreads. He looked horrible, he couldn't breathe. I was telling him to 



A. MONCHERRY 

hold on. So I grab him. A few seconds later I hear shelter, shelter. So we all start going 
towards the voice, it was a bodega grocery store. We all went inside the store, they 
closed the door, gave everybody water and took care of them. Told everybody to not 
swallow, just gargle and spit it out. We waited a little while, treated as much as we could 
inside the store with whatever resources we had at the moment. Moments later, I'm not 
sure about the time, the smoke started to subside a little, just from the top you could see it 
clearing up a little, slightly. It was at that time that we heard police officers, I guess 
chiefs, telling us all, EMS units and fire, all you guys come on out, we gotta get the rest 
of the people out. So after helping out as many as we could in the store, I put my gear 
back on, whatever gear I had left. We ran back out, I had a tee-shirt, I forgot to mention, 
that's the only thing I had in terms of covering my airway. We went back towards the 
building, Tower One. I don't know where cause it's still dark everywhere. So, when I 
went back, I just started helping people out, any which way we could. I remember an 
African- American female, she had a four year old or a five year old daughter with her, 
and another child, I'd say less than a year old in the stroller. They're all covered up in 
stuff, in soot and everything. I'm looking at her, she's screaming, she doesn't know what 
to do or where to go. I told her, I just grabbed the baby that was in the stroller, and there 
was a police officer who was next to me, he grabbed the four-year-old, and we all started 
going towards the building. I think it was one of the court houses over there. We took 
her inside there. I was so. . .1 guess it was the adrenaline kicking in, I just wanted to get 
her inside, out of that environment. I didn't even bother looking at the child, cause it was 



A. MONCHERRY 

sort of covered up a little bit, so I figured it was okay. I was like get in, get out. Take the 
baby in there, daughter's in there and she's okay. I didn't have time to look at the child 
to be honest with you, and look at her, cause there were other people there. I just ran 
back out to help some more. At that time I bumped into my partner. I heard his voice out 
there, and we ran into each other. We just started crying right then and there, you know. 
And a couple minutes after that, another one of our partners out of at the station, Luis 
Diaz, was found, we found him. Luis was not himself to say the least when we found 
him. He didn't have his helmet on, and he was down crying. I knew it was him cause he 
has a bald head just like me. He has a shiny bald head, but it wasn't shiny. We found 
him, I hugged him, and we just cried together right there for about five minutes. I don't 
know how long, but it was a long time. After that we said we still have a job to do. We 
have to go back out there and help these people as much as we could, and that's what we 
did. Now I guess the second tower started coming down. Just by looking, I would say 
we were about 300 feet, maybe a little more, maybe 400 feet away from it. But it came 
down, and the same thing. Everyone started running. At that point I just didn't know 
what was going on and why this was happening. It just wasn't good. We were stuck 
there for awhile, we stayed together Kevin Barret, Luis Diaz and myself. We started 
finding people along the way, co-workers. We later found a captain, I don't remember 
her name, but I know she works out of Battalion 50 in Jamaica. I think she's a 
Lieutenant. We found her and she told us where the next staging area is, and we headed 



A. MONCHERRY 



towards the next staging area. I don't recall where exactly it was. I know we walked a 
long way. 

Q: Could it be here? 

A: I think so, I think so. I know when the Lieutenant told us where to go, that 
wasn't the correct staging area, cause we were still too close to the buildings. They 
wanted everyone away from it. That's when there was a third building that collapsed 
around that time. 

Q: Building Seven, which would be over here. 

A: Okay, 7 World Trade, that one collapsed. 

Q: 7 World Trade collapsed a little later. 

A: Yeah, a lot later. That happened en route, while we were walking towards 
our unit. 

Q: That happened at 5:25. 

A: Wow. We stuck around there for a long time. I would say for most of the 
day and night. Later on that night we were told to go to Chelsea Piers. That's where the 
Emergency Room was, the make-shift ER. We went there, and we were trying to figure 
out who was missing. For a long time no one knew where we were. We were the guys 
missing, and everyone was down there looking for us. So at that time we formed a little 
group, from 10 to 15 EMTs, and we went out of this area to try to go back for the guys 
who were not accounted for. Like Carlos and Luis' partner Paul Adams. 



10 
A. MONCHERRY 

That was one of the people we were looking for while Kevin, Luis and I, he was the next 
person we were trying to find. We finally got that Paul was okay, I think I heard his 
voice on the radio and I told Luis that he was okay. We didn't know where he was. We 
couldn't find Carlos, but there was nothing else that we could actually do. But I felt like 
we should at least try, you know? At least try and get him. That's something that not too 
many people know about until now I guess. And that was it. We stayed there for awhile, 
I'd say we were released maybe 20 hours later. I haven't been back since. The only 
thing I keep is my boots. I don't even polish them anymore, they still have the ash on 
them. That's the only thing I keep as remembrance. And the smell on the ambulance. . . 

Q: Is there anything else you would like to add on the events of September 
12, 2001 prior to approximately 12:00? 

A: No. 

Q: Okay, well thank you very much for conducting this interview with me. 
This interview is being concluded at 22:40 hours. Thank you very much. 

A: Thank you. 



File No. 911012? 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

EMT LUIS SANCHEZ 

Interview Date: October 22, 2001 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



L. SANCHEZ 2 

MR. ECCLESTON: Today's date is October 
22nd, 2001. The time is 2256. My name is 
Christopher Eccleston of the New York City 
Fire Department, World Trade Center Task 
Force. I'm conducting an interview with the 
following individual. 

Please state your name. 
EMT SANCHEZ: Luis Sanchez. 
MR. ECCLESTON: Your title. 
EMT SANCHEZ : EMT . 

MR. ECCLESTON: And your command. 
EMT SANCHEZ: 49. 
Q. Were you working on September 11th, 
2001? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Were you assigned to the World Trade 
Center disaster? 
A. Yes. 

Q. Can you please tell me in your own 
words about the details of that day? 

A. Well, at the beginning of the day it 
was just like a regular Tuesday, just going to 
work, preparing for the day and everything for my 
tour, which was tour 2. 



L. SANCHEZ 3 

I'm not too sure what unit I was 
working, but my partner was broke in with someone 
else, and I had a new partner. 

Q. Who were you working with that day? 
A. I think her name was Brandon. I'm not 
too sure if it was Brandon or not. I believe it 
was Brandon. 

We started at 7:00. I think we started 
at 7:00. We just started at 7:00. We had a call 
for that day, which was a cardiac arrest. I 
think it was approximately 7:30. We went to the 
call, and everything went fine. There wasn't a 
cardiac arrest. It turned out to be an asthma 
attack. So we went in and helped the patient and 
everything. We took the patient to the hospital, 
and after that it was all clear. 

We got cleared at about approximately 
7:45, around there. I'm not sure what time it 
was. All I know is five minutes after we 
received a call saying that a plane just crashed 
into the twin towers, one of the towers. 

My partner told me -- I looked at him 
like what's going on here? I thought he was 
playing around. He told me, look, it's serious. 



L. SANCHEZ 4 

We went to up to the park to get a good view of 
the towers. When I saw the smoke coming out of 
one of the buildings, I said, oh, shoot, it is 
real . 

So he told me it's an MCI so we had to 
go to the command post and go along over the 
bridge to the place. The problem is after 
everything, we started heading up to the place, 
the towers, and there was about 20 units right 
behind us and police officers and firefighters, 
right behind us, right in front of us, 
everywhere. It was crazy, real chaos. 

We just got there. When we got there, 
I didn't really know where we were at. It was 
one of the towers. I don't know if it was the 
front, back, side. All I know is there was a lot 
of people outside. People were hurt. People 
were yelling and screaming. We were right in 
front of it, about a block away from it, 
actually. 

My partner told me not to get nervous, 
just stay calm, everything is going to be all 
right, it's going to be just like a regular call. 
I said okay. I asked him if we should stay 



L. SANCHEZ 5 

together, should we stay together. He said, just 
go and follow along with the patients. Just help 
whatever patients, who feels hurt, doesn't feel 
good. I said okay. 

So I went out, and I was looking around 
for other patients, any patients that I saw to 
help out, because I had no experience. This is 
my second week on the job, and I had no 
experience at all. 

I see patients coming out from the 
building, and I started, you know, just putting 
them in a safer place, which was a block away. I 
had a patient that had asthma. I had a patient 
that had a laceration on the forehead, and I was 
sitting him down and giving him 02 oxygen and 
trying to manage, do the best I can. 

I was just looking at people. I saw 
EMTs helping out, and I was like good, now I feel 
more comfortable helping out. Finally I saw one 
of my friends who graduated with me. I saw him, 
and we started working together, which was good 
for me. We sort of had the same experience. We 
didn't know what to expect. So we're like, cool. 
We were both nervous and didn't know what to 



L. SANCHEZ 6 

expect helping out the patients and everything. 

So all of a sudden we had this other 
patient come out of asthma, throwing up, 
vomiting, screaming and just yelling. She was 
just real nervous. We were just telling her it 
was going to be okay, it was going to be, don't 
be nervous, everything's going to be all right. 
We just gave her 02, and she seemed to calm down. 
But she was throwing up. We were trying to make 
her feel better, saying jokes, anything to make 
her feel good, better. 

Five minutes later I just heard this 
loud noise. It was like an earthquake. It was 
shaking, and things was going down. I looked 
everywhere. There was nothing going on. I 
looked to the side, looked to my friend. There 
was nothing going on. When I looked up, I saw 
the top of the building floor by floor was coming 
down, collapsing. I was oh. (Inaudible.) 

I looked at my patients . They were all 
there, just throwing up. They didn't know what 
was going on. I looked at everybody. They 
seemed like they didn't know what was going on. 

All of a sudden I just looked up and 



L. SANCHEZ 7 

said this is for real, is this a dream or what? 
I'm like, what do I do? Do I run? What do I do? 
Pick up the patients? Call my partner? What I 
did was I screamed, I yelled. I said, "The 
building's collapsing. The building's 
collapsing. Everybody run." 

What I did was just dropped everything 
I had the radio -- I had the radio -- and just 
ran, just ran as fast as I can before I get 
trapped between the buildings or anything. I 
just ran. 

All of a sudden I see this firefighter 
who was helping a patient. They didn't know what 
was going on. He was looking down towards the 
patient. He looked like he was just like focused 
on the patient. She had a big laceration on her 
leg. He was right in front of me. I just pushed 
him to the side and just told him to run because 
the building was collapsing. 

I just kept running. I just kept 
running for approximately 20 blocks after that, 
20 blocks, kept running, until everything was 
cleared. There was smoke everywhere. You 
couldn't see anything. I just kept running until 



L. SANCHEZ 8 

everything was all clear. 

Once I got there for about ten blocks, 
I was with police officers and I started to help 
them. It was about approximately 2:00 -- sorry, 
it was about 10:00 when that happened. I started 
helping out with the police officers. I bumped 
into one of my friends who is a police officer, 
and we just hugged each other. We were started 
saying, "Oh, my goodness, this is crazy. What's 
going on here?" We just heard about there's 
another plane that just hit Washington, D.C. We 
were getting nervous . 

I started helping them out for about an 
hour, just directing the people, where to go, go 
to a safer place and not to panic, to calm down 
and everything. I was there with them for two 
hours. After two hours, I hooked up with 
paramedics. I was with them, they went to 
Bellvue Hospital, and I was helping out at 
Bellvue hospital, bringing patients in from the 
streets, for about two hours, approximately. 

After that I was with -- we went south 
together. We went down to get more patients to 
bring to the hospital. We went down south. For 



L. SANCHEZ 9 

some reason I just couldn't find them anymore. 
So I saw some units from Brooklyn, some people 
that I know. So I hooked up with them for a 
little while, and they brought me over to Chelsea 
Piers. That's where we were just all stationed 
and doing triage. 

From there on we just stayed all 
together. I saw more people that I graduated 
with and started helping them and just broke 
down. We both broke down and couldn't believe 
what we saw. It was just crazy, the things that 
we saw. 

We never expected to see something like 
this, and we were never prepared for anything 
like this. We thought we were prepared for 
anything at the academy. In two weeks we just -- 
we wouldn't believe what we just saw that day of 
the 11th. It was really intense. 

I was worried about my parents, calling 
them. I couldn't get in contact with them. 

I got over to the station about 2:00 in 
the morning. I was working about 20 hours that 
day. I was exhausted, went home, just broke 
down. My mother broke down also. I said to 



L. SANCHEZ 



10 



myself whatever God wants, if that's his will for 
this to happen, that's the way it's going to 
happen if that's the way he wants it. That's 
just the way it's going to be. 

I tried to keep myself calm and 
everything . 



That's all that I saw that day, the 
things that I felt. 

Q. Do you know where you were when the 
second tower came down? 

A. The second tower? 

Q. Were you in the area when the second 
tower came down or were you further away? 

A. When we got there, I don't know if the 
first tower fell or not. What I know is when we 
got there -- I couldn't see the second tower. 
All I saw was the first tower. I don't know if 
it was the first or second. All I know is that 
when I got there there was a lot of people. It 
was one of the towers -- I can't remember whether 



L. SANCHEZ 11 

it was one or two. 

All I know is approximately 15 minutes 
and the collapse, everybody just sprinted. 
Everything was a mess. I ended up -- people 
ended up in New Jersey, Queens, Bronx, 
everywhere. Everything was just all mixed up. 
From then on, I was with police officers and 
other units . 

Q. Is there anything else you would like 
to add to this interview in regards to the events 
that happened before noon? 

A. Before noon? Not really. 

Q. Okay. I thank you very much for 
conducting this interview with me? 

MR. ECCLESTON: The time is 2308, and 

this interview is concluded. 



File No. 9110130 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

ELOY ALBUERME 

Interview Date: October 23, 2001 



Transcribed by Maureen McCormick 



MR. RADENBERG: Today is October 23, 2001. 
I'm Paul Radenberg of the Fire Department, City of 
New York. The time is now 0603 hours. I am 
conducting an interview with -- 

LIEUTENANT ALBUERME: Lieutenant Albuerme, 
Shield 108. 

MR. RADENBERG: Of EMS Battalion No. 8. 
This interview is being conducted at EMS 
Battalion 8 regarding the events of September 11, 
2001. 

LIEUTENANT ALBUERME: On September 11, 2001, 
I was assigned to an M.O.S. daughter who was sick at 
the school. Responded there. Before we responded 
there, I heard the call come down that an explosion 
occurred at the World Trade Center. Then I called my 
CO, and I advised him of such so he can respond. 

At the completion of my assignment, I called 
citywide through my cell phone, advised the citywide 
tour commander that I was going to respond to the World 
Trade Center. 

I responded into the World Trade Center 
southbound on 7th Avenue into West Broadway, which at 
West Broadway and Murray Street, I stopped to assist a 
unit that had eleven patients from -- that were injured 



ELOY ALBUERME 

due to the incident. 

At the completion of that, I then went down 
to Barclay street, which I made a right to West Street, 
which I made a right, which I also encountered a couple 
of units, a few units that were sitting right there on 
West Street and Murray. 

I asked one of the medics to have all the 
vehicles turn around facing northbound and to collect a 
key and make that as a staging area. 

At that time, one of the trade buildings 
collapsed, and I turned right -- turned left on Murray 
Street, using the District 37 building as my cover, 
which at that time I was screaming out to everybody to 
come my way to use the building as a cover, and then 
after that I assisted (inaudible) for the people to be 
evacuated, and then I don't know how I got to Chambers 
Street, but I went down on Chambers Street, and we just 
started setting up triage area at the Manhattan 
Community College, so in case we had to take any of the 
personnel, and after that I encountered a couple of EMS 
personnel that had their cell phone on them, which I 
used their cell phone number as a communication device 
in case --so that way we can talk to each other, since 
all the radio communication at that time was down. 



ELOY ALBUERME 

On my way to where the EMS command center 
was, I went over there and I tried to speak to an EMS 
chief that I have started communication, I had two 
different staging areas set up for ambulance to respond 
in case we need them. 

At that time, I was told to go and see the 
captain. The captain then told me to go see the 
chief. The chief told me to go back to the captain, 
who told me I will be in charge of transport right at 
the Chambers command center. 

After that, it just stayed there until 2:30 
in the morning, return to the station, and I went 
home. 

Q. The first unit that you met up with on Murray 
and West Broadway, do you remember what unit it was, 
EMS unit or a volley? 

A. They were a vollie unit. 

Q. A vollie unit? 

A. Okay, they were a vollie unit, and then I had 
a 911 unit. I think it was ten charlie from -- sorry, 
from Lenox Hill, and I think one unit from St. 
Vincent ' s . 

Q. And on West and Barclay, the units that were 
there? 



ELOY ALBUERME 

A. All EMS units. 

Q. All EMS units? 

A. Right. 

Q. Do you remember which units they were offhand 



or 



A. No idea. 

Q. Recognize any of the personnel? 

A. I didn't recognize no other personnel. That 
is why I asked who was the senior man, and I had to put 
a senior man in charge of that staging area. 

What I did ask was turn around and face north 
so in case they have to transport, they had a clear 
avenue to transport, and as they were turning the 
vehicle around, that's when the tower building came 
down. I don't know which building came down, but I 
know one of the buildings came down. 

Q. When you were on Murray Street itself, by the 
D.C. 37 building, any other EMS personnel with you? 

A. No, I was by myself. 

Q. You were by yourself? They all went north on 
the Westside Highway? 

A. They all went north on the Westside Highway. 

Q. With the collapse? 

A. Right, with the collapse. 



ELOY ALBUERME 

Q. Do you know that chief and the captain? 

A. There were a whole bunch of chiefs there. 
The captain I just don't remember his name, but there 
were a whole bunch of EMS chiefs there. 

Q. And they were up on Chambers? 

A. Chambers, there is -- yeah, they established 
command . 

Q. Anything else you'd like to add? 

A. Basically no. I think that we should start 
doing more drilling on an incident like this, as far as 
I think that we haven't done in many years because 
they're too comfortable. It's not only keeping in 
practice to have a lot of (inaudible) to make sure that 
everything is done correctly. 

You have proper training, like the army had 
the war games and things like that. We have this 
command, this system. We should have that more often, 
you know, and in a city anything could happen. 

MR. RADENBERG: Okay. The time is now 0609 

hours, and the interview is concluded. 



File No. 9110131 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

PARAMEDIC ARTURO GONZALEZ 

Interview Date: October 23, 2001 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



A. GONZALEZ 2 

MR. RADENBERG: Today is October 23rd, 
2001. I'm Paul Radenberg of the Fire 
Department, City of New York. I'm 
conducting an interview with -- 

PARAMEDIC GONZALEZ: Arturo Gonzalez at 
Battalion 8 and I'm paramedic 3675. 

MR. RADENBERG: This interview is being 
conducted at EMS Battalion 8 regarding the 
events of the morning of September 11th. 
The interview start time is 0634. 
A. We start with -- we received a call to 
go down to the World Trade Center. The exact 
time I don't know. It was about 8:40, 8:45, 
around there. When we responded down, we went 
down West Street. We saw building number one had 
fire on the top floor. You could see that right 
actually from 34th Street. 

Upon arrival we parked at West Street 
in front of One World Trade Center. That's where 
we stationed at. We took our equipment. We 
stayed there at least 24 minutes, more or less, 
give or take. 

The second explosion came in building 
number two, in that area. We didn't actually see 



A. GONZALEZ 3 

the plane, but we heard the explosion. We were 
told to go into that building, Merrill Lynch 
right there, the building in the lobby to set up 
the triage. 

As soon as we set up triage there, 
building number two went down, and all the 
windows in the Merrill Lynch lobby, they were all 
out . 

We ran out of that building, and we 
went to proceed to the next building that was 
across the street. I'm assuming that's the 
American Express building we ended up on. And we 
went in that building, and all the glass exploded 
in that building too. 

So we went out of that building and ran 
into the park that's behind the Winter Garden, in 
that area. It was too much smoke coming out of 
the whole area. 

We ran to the Stuyvesant High School, 
that I don't see in the map there. We stayed a 
few minutes there. People started running up 
West Street. Me and my partner that was -- we 
switched partners because my partner parted -- 
Rick Perez, we decided to go back and get the 



A. GONZALEZ 4 

MERV. The exact location should be right here. 
So I'm not sure which street this is, Merrill 
Lynch on the right side. 

Q. South side of the Merrill Lynch 
building. 

A. We picked up the MERV there because it 
was abandoned because of the collapse of the 
building. We proceeded eastbound to West Street, 
and we stationed at Vesey and West. We were told 
to stop and treat patients, because patients were 
coming out of the area. 

From that location, we stayed there all 
night up till 6:30 in the morning, 5:45 to 6:00 
in the morning to be precise, treating patients 
there and treating members of the service and all 
the departments. So during that time we saw -- 
mostly we saw maybe two patients, three patients. 

Then from there by mistake I took a 
walk up to this building here. I'm not sure what 
this is, one of these buildings, and there were 
154 elderly trapped in the basement -- not 
trapped but they wanted to get out. We had to 
relocate it back to my commander and see how we 
could get them out. We decided it was safer to 



A. GONZALEZ 5 

stay there. 

Then we went back to the MERV and just 
kept on treating patients all night, just back 
and forth. If you're asking for the time frame 
between the period of the plane crash and the 
second one and the building collapse, we were 
from the location into this building, switched to 
another building, ran to the park and then ran to 
Stuyvesant High School. Then we relocate to get 
the MERV. That's a big vehicle we had. 

When we were trying to proceed north, 
we were stopped at Vesey and West to treat 
patients, and we didn't move from that location 
all that time. 

Q. When you arrived here on West opposite 
number One World Trade -- 

A. Right. 

Q. -- aside from your partner, did you see 
anybody else there from EMS or the Fire 
Department that you recognized? Do you know the 
names? 

A. Not Fire Department. There were some 
Fire Department vehicles there. EMS, there were 
about four or five units there at that location, 



A. GONZALEZ 6 

standing there. 

Q. City units or privates? 

A. There was only one city unit, and the 
rest were voluntaries. 

Q. Do you recall what unit that was, the 
city unit? 

A. I think it was 7 Charlie. 

Q. 7 Charlie? 

A. Yes. 7 Charlie was the unit that was 
there, city unit. That's the only one I remember 
as a city unit. 

Q. Did you recognize the crew at all? 

A. Yeah, one of the crew members. No, 
both of them. I remember both. They're working 
here today, I think. They both were on the 
scene, yes. The others were voluntaries. 

Q. Any EMS officers that you recall there, 
lieutenants, captains? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Chiefs? 

A. There was Captain Stone. Chief 
Carrasquillo was there, Chief Kowalczyk. That's 
all I can remember offhand. At that time frame, 
those are the three I remember at the moment. In 



A. GONZALEZ 7 

the evening I saw most of the other chiefs, like 
Chief McCracken, the captains and all that stuff, 
Pinky. Lieutenant Albuerme was there too. But 
then the time frame from the plane crash and in 
that time, those are the three I remember. 

Q. When the building started coming down 
and you went into Merrill Lynch, Two World 
Financial, did everybody that was with you on 
West Street go in there, as far as you know? 

A. I can't remember, because there was so 
much panic and running, everybody was spread. I 
don't think everybody entered the building. I 
think some people just went up West Street and 
some people went out the other direction. They 
all were separating. 

We actually stayed about 20 minutes 
here watching people jumping out of the building. 
Actually they were jumping, landing on West 
Street. There was about 20 -- we watched about 
18 to 20 people jump out of the building, and 
they were landing on West Street or right in 
front of the World Trade Center. 

Q. The concourse? 

A. Yeah. They were just landing in front. 



A. GONZALEZ 8 

We could watch them and that's it. 

Then when the second plane crashed, the 
explosion, they decided to move us -- move 
further up. Somebody was screaming that another 
plane crashed. The next thing is we're in here 
but running out of all these buildings because of 
the explosion and the crashes that every building 
was creating and spreading all over the place. 

Most of the units disappeared and went 
up. I think what happened -- we're the only one 
that came back and picked up the MERV then stayed 
there. We were the only unit there for a while, 
up to maybe them, they came back to us. 

Q. Anything else you'd like to add, 
opinions? 

A. No. I mean, we were not expecting what 
happened there. They caught us by surprise. I 
just remember that one of the officers took all 
the keys to -- usually you park somewhere and the 
officer takes the keys. That officer was never 
found. Most of these vehicles were left on the 
scene because the reason is they didn't have the 
keys. 

Q. They didn't have the keys. 



A. GONZALEZ 9 

A. The officer that took the keys, we 
never found. I don't know who it was, but we 
never found them at that time period. Luckily 
Rick had a copy of the MERV, and we wanted to 
move slow but we had to stop because we were the 
only ambulance active at that moment, the MERV. 
They told us to stop and treat people, and that's 
where we stayed all night. 

Q. Okay. I thank you very much. 

MR. RADENBERG: The time is now 0643. 

The interview is concluded. 



File No. 9110132 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMT JOSE PEREZ 
Interview Date: October 23, 2001 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



J. PEREZ 2 

MR. TAMBASCO: Today is October 23rd. 

I'm Mike Tambasco with the World Trade 

Center Task Force. We're conducting an 

interview into the events of the morning of 

September 11th at the World Trade Center. 

We are in the lounge at EMS Battalion 8. 

The time is 6:04 a.m., and the interview is 

being conducted with -- 

EMT PEREZ: Jose Perez, emergency 

medical technician, Battalion 8. 

Q. Jose, tell us your story. 

A. From the beginning we were at 48th and 
Lexington or thereabouts when we heard it come 
over the radio that a plane hit one of the World 
Trade Centers. At first I just thought it was 
like one of those single-engine planes. 

Then I guess because of all the 
excitement and everything we kind of just started 
to head down to some extent. I know all the 
south units were already down there. So we kind 
of UCA'd ourselves, and we ended up at 11th and 
seventh in front of St. Vincent's. We could see 
both of the towers. At that time when we got 
down there, they were both engulfed in flames. 



J. PEREZ 3 

At some point we just saw the first 
tower fall, and we were amazed. I was with my 
partner, Joe Valdivia, and we both were shaking 
our heads and were shaking. We decided to go 
down, and we took the West Side Highway. At some 
point we just couldn't go any further because 
people were starting to come up, so we threw it 
in park and basically just -- 

Q. Do you know about how far down you got? 

A. I don't really remember. I think it 
was -- I want to say Bank Street -- actually it 
was further down, I think. I don't recall 
exactly. 

Q. Okay. 

A. So we just helped as much as we can 
with everybody that was coming out. Then the 
second building fell. I think for me it was just 
unbelievable, the whole thing. For the first few 
days it was something that I thought didn't 
really happen. I just had to convince myself 
that it did. I just had a good support system at 
my home with my wife and family. The people 
here, it was good to talk to. 

I think initially the problem was 



J. PEREZ 4 

people who were coming out, some of us were 
missing. So we really didn't know what was going 
on with certain people here. 

Q. A lot of misinformation. You had no 
idea? 

A. Right. Especially after the first 
building fell because everybody was calling a 
mayday, and we didn't know who was actually close 
enough to be involved in all that. Luckily 
everybody from our station's okay. I knew by 
face certain people but not really personally. 
So it's pretty devastating all around. 

I think that's basically it. It was 
traumatic. I think it was helpful being here for 
a while with everybody. 

Q. I was going to say, were you working 
for like days after that? 

A. Yeah, it seemed long for a few days 
afterwards, but it kind of diminished a little 
bit. We coped. We were able to help each other 
out and support each other. 

That ' s basically it . 

Q. Is there anything else you would like 
to add to it at all? 



J. PEREZ 5 

A. No, just like I said, I think it was 
very unreal at the time. It seemed like it was a 
movie and it wasn't really happening. After a 
few hours, you know it's real. 

Q. All right, Jose. I thank you for your 
interview? 

MR. TAMBASCO: The interview we're 

concluding at 6:08 a.m. 



File No. 9110133 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

EMT NORBERTO TORRES 

Interview Date: October 23, 2001 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



N. TORRES 2 

MR. TAMBASCO: Today is October 23rd. 
I'm Mike Tambasco, assigned to the World 
Trade Center Task Force. The time is now 
0545 a.m., again, on the 23rd of October. 
We're in the lounge at Battalion 8 
conducting an interview into the events of 
the morning of September 11th at the World 
Trade Center. The interview is being 
conducted with -- 

EMT TORRES: Norberto J. Torres, 
assigned to Battalion 8. 
Q. Norberto, I just ask you to tell me 
your story. 

A. On September 11th we had been on a job 
with a GYN. hemorrhage going into Bellevue when I 
heard over the radio that an airplane had struck 
the World Trade Center. We dropped off the 
patient, and as I de-conned the bus, I continued 
to listen to what the radio was saying, what was 
going over, the transmissions. 

While we were still 81, I heard someone 
scream over the radio that another plane had 
struck the second tower. Then upon hearing this, 
me and my partner decided let's go buff the job. 



N. TORRES 3 

We'll head down there. We'll see what's up. 

We got assigned to the call, headed 
down there. As we approached, we saw the towers 
were -- smoke billowing, the towers engulfed in 
flame. We proceeded to where they assigned us to 
West and Vesey. Originally we parked at the end 
of the line on Vesey, which is further in front 
of the -- what is that place? The Tex-Mex place 
at the end on the right-hand side, we were right 
across from that. 

Lieutenant Nevins at the scene informed 
me to move the bus, that he wanted it closer up 
so that we would be ready to pick up patients and 
head to the hospital if we're needed. 

We moved all our equipment and got 
ready for whatever procedures that might be 
necessary, whether it's to send us further in or 
to set up a triage in front of AMEX. 

As I moved the bus, we got closer to 
the zone. You saw people jumping out of the 
buildings. You saw debris everywhere, numerous 
injured personnel running towards us, everyone 
covers in ashes and soot. 

We parked the vehicle, we got all our 



N. TORRES 4 

equipment off, and we started heading towards the 
corner of West and Vesey. They were just 
throwing all the patients towards us, trying to 
get everybody out of the building. 

We treated, as we went, numerous 
patients, putting them in the back. Those that 
couldn't walk, we carried those that needed to be 
on a stretcher while not -- we got them whatever 
help we could and got them far back. 

The dust was intense, so I ran back to 
go get some masks, and we met -- there were 
chiefs and whatnot on the scene. One of the 
captains asked me to get all the masks from my 
vehicle and bring the masks to the personnel, the 
PD, whoever was there that didn't have a mask. I 
did that. I also went into other vehicles, got 
the masks, and gave masks to other people. 

From there I was talking to J.R. Rivera 
at the time trying to get one of the chiefs a 
mask when the first building started to come 
down. All we heard was like a loud, thunderous 
roar. At first everybody was like, oh, no, 
another plane? There was all kinds of reports 
going on that there were numerous planes headed 



N. TORRES 5 

towards the financial district. 

You looked up and all you saw was a 
wall of debris blocking out the sky coming at 
you. We ran. I ended up in an outcropping of 
one of the buildings, just hiding until the 
debris blew past. It seemed like forever. It 
took maybe less than a minute or whatnot of just 
everything being blown past. 

Around the corner where they had set up 
the new staging for West and Vesey, which was -- 
excuse me, I don't know the name of that. 

Q. Probably westward, right, towards -- 

A. North End? 

Q. North End? 

A. Right. We were redirected there. They 
brought the MERV. One of the lieutenants asked 
for volunteers to go get the vehicles, so I 
volunteered. He described the car where he had 
placed the keys for the vehicles, because as you 
got there you were to turn over your keys. But 
since some of the vehicles -- a lot of the 
vehicles, the doors were locked, we needed a key. 
He described he had placed them on top of a blue 
Crown Victoria. 



N. TORRES 6 

So I went back to the scene. Even 
though every car was gray, I found a Crown 
Victoria at the scene where he was. I started 
digging under the pile of debris that was at the 
wheel well. There was nothing on top of the car. 
We found the keys. 

I handed off some keys to some fellow 
EMTs that were there, and we started to just 
bring the buses back around the corner. We got 
the majority of them back around the corner. 
There was only like one or two that were dead 
that wouldn't turn over. 

As we did that, somebody called my 
attention - - as I checked one of the vehicles 
that was dead, I believe vehicle 470, it just 
wouldn't turn on, PD called my attention that 
there were a couple of injured people that were 
bleeding everywhere. They wanted some help 
bringing them around the corner. 

I headed towards the corner of West and 
Vesey, and we started to lend a hand just 
bringing people around the corner, numerous 
injured. At that point I believe the second 
building came down. It was just another loud, 



N. TORRES 7 

thunderous roar and everybody just running, 
scurrying. No matter what was wrong with the 
person, you just get up and run. If you can't 
run, I'll carry you, whatever. 

We made it around the corner. We stood 
there. From that point Chief Kowalczyk, he came 
up to me and said they were setting up a staging 
at Chelsea Piers and he needed me to drive him up 
there. So I jumped in an ambulance with him and 
escorted -- well, I took him up to Chelsea Piers. 
From there we set up a staging area at Chelsea 
Piers with the ambulances that had been 
dispatched to that area over there. 

Being that I felt I wasn't doing enough 
there by being at Chelsea Piers, I jumped on the 
back of the U.S.A. R. gator that was heading back 
towards the zone. From there I went over to the 
school where they said we had a command post. We 
had everything on Chambers and West. 

I went there and informed the 
lieutenants that I was back, because as I had 
been told, I was presumed dead. Since they had a 
problem, they hadn't seen me for about a half 
hour. So I spoke to my lieutenants and told them 



N. TORRES 8 

I was still amongst the rank and file. From 
there I was sent into the auditorium with all the 
other EMTs to prepare for whatever the scenario 
was. 

We were in the auditorium of Stuyvesant 
High School for what felt like forever. It 
turned out to be like eight, ten hours. From 
there they just -- nobody basically knew what to 
do. This had never happened before, so nobody 
knew how to help or anything like that. 

So they started to send out teams to go 
to the wreckage and to help with the morgue and 
to just basically search and see if there's still 
anybody down there. So we waited, and I managed 
to get on a team that was going to set up a 
forward triage in one of the hotels along I guess 
North End Avenue back there, River Terrace, maybe 
one of those hotels, apartment buildings. 

Under the command of Lieutenant 
Eppinger, me and the fellow EMTs, we basically 
cleaned out an area, set up a treatment area for 
irrigations, cuts, bruises. We still expected we 
were going to get patients at that point. From 
there we just waited. We were there maybe five 



N. TORRES 9 

hours. No patients. There was nobody coming out 
of there. 

From there, being that I had been on 
the scene for like 22 hours, they decided to 
relieve people and send in fresh batches. So 
from there they just shipped me out. I came back 
to the station, took a shower, washed off all the 
soot, put on a brand-new uniform and went back 
down to the scene. 

Q. Anything else you would like to put in? 

A. No. I think I'll keep my mouth shut. 

Q. Not a problem. Thank you so much for 
the interview. 

A. No problem. 

MR. TAMBASCO: The interview is over at 

0556 hours. 



File No. 9110134 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
DAVID BLACKSBERG 
Interview Date: October 23, 2001 



Transcribed by Maureen McCormick 



MR. DUN: Today is October 23, 2001. The 
time is 555 hours in the morning, and this is 
Richard Dun with the New York City Fire 
Department, working with Marisa Abbriano, and we 
are interviewing -- 

MR. BLACKS BERG: DAVID BLACKS BERG, EMT, 
Battalion 31. 

Q. Can you just describe in your own words 
regarding the events of September 11, 2001? 

A. About eight o'clock in the morning, we were 
driving by the base of the Brooklyn Bridge, my partner 
and I, and we sat, and an ALS vehicle approached us. 
We were sitting by -- we looked up and all of a sudden 
-- we were ready -- we heard something, and we looked 
up because we were right across the water, and we had 
seen Tower 1 at that time was already on fire. 
The paramedic unit that we work with 
approached us and said, "Let's go." We went, and we 
were able to get onto the Brooklyn Bridge and cross. 
We were at the intersection, I guess, of West and 
Liberty, a little bit -- a little bit further north of 
that, so we were right across the street of 1 World 
Trade. We got out of the ALS vehicle, and I -- we 
parked our vehicles right across the street. We got 



DAVID BLACKSBERG 

out. We put our helmets on and our turnout coats. 

We approached the building, and we heard some 
loud noise. We felt some rumbling, so we looked up, 
and there was another plane coming in. Went behind, I 
guess it banked around another building, so at that 
time we didn't really see it hit the building, but we 
heard it, and we felt it, and we saw it approaching. 
We got to get back in our vehicles. So we 
got back in, and we only ended up going -- I guess it 
felt like a mile away, but it's half a block. 

Q. Where did you first stop the vehicle? 

A. We first stopped right on the west side. 

Q. West Street? 

A. Right on West Street, yeah, and Westside 
Highway. 

Q. Right. 

A. Right in front of 1 World Trade. 

Q. Okay. 

A. We were right in at the -- there's I guess 
what is it called, the median -- no. 

Q. The walkway? 

A. Yeah, the walkway in between the highway. 

Q. That goes into -- 

A. No, the one that goes right in between the 



DAVID BLACKSBERG 

highway. 

Q. By the Winter Garden? 

A. Yeah. 

Q. That glass thing. 

A. Right. We originally parked over there right 
on the highway, and we ended up parking -- moving our 
vehicles, and we parked underneath the pedestrian 
walkway going from Winter Garden to I guess it was 2 
World Financial Center, over there. 

We parked our vehicles there. We got out, 
and we had made our own staging over there at that 
time, because everybody was split up, and we had to 
split up once we got out of our vehicles, and we saw 
that second plane hit. We had to move, and when we 
moved, we wound up making our own staging. 

Q. Was there a lot of chaos, commotion, people 
running? 

A. There were a lot of people running all over 
the place and -- 

Q. Running towards you? 

A. They were running away. Well, toward us, 
toward other vehicles and just away in general. I 
didn't even know until a couple of people told me later 
that there were a whole lot of people crossing the 



DAVID BLACKSBERG 

Brooklyn Bridge, but I just knew everybody was 
scattered all over the place. 

At that time, we had approximately four 
people approach us, and a fifth one was coming saying, 
"There's somebody coming that's really badly burned." 
I got the ALS unit ready, and I told them, and we had 
the person that was really badly burned -- I told them 
to get back onto the paramedic trunk, and they took 
care of him. 

Q. Who was the ALS unit? 

A. 32 Victor. 

Q. Do you know their names? 

A. Ellen -- I don't remember the last name -- 
and her partner. I don't recall. They are from Long 
Island College Hospital. 

Q. Okay. 

A. And so they took the burn victim while we 
were handling everybody else, and I had called over the 
radio telling them that we had formed a new staging 
area. I don't know whether they heard me or not, 
because there was a whole lot of chaos. 

Q. Was this before either tower came down? 

A. Yeah, this was way before either tower came 
down. This was right after Tower 2 had gotten hit, 



DAVID BLACKSBERG 

within two minutes I believe, if that long. 

So 32, they took the burn victim to Cornell, 
and we were by ourselves, my partner and I, just 
getting overloaded with a whole lot of patients, and we 
had no idea if there was anybody else coming. We 
stabilized them as much as we could. 

People were coming down with minor bruises. 
They asked if they needed to go to the hospital. I 
said, "If you're walking and can tell what's going on, 
you can, you know, just keep walking away. There is 
nothing much I can do for you right now, because I have 
a whole lot of people." 

I don't know, you know, a whole lot of 
commotion going on, so finally everybody is saying, you 
know, there's people coming or there's somebody down in 
front of the building. I'm approaching the building, 
but there's a whole lot of debris coming down, so I 
decided not to an approach, go into the building. Got 
as close as I could. 

There was just bodies everywhere. We were 
watching them coming down. We heard them coming down, 
everybody screaming. A lot of debris. We didn't even 
know what it was. I guess it was metal, and papers and 
computers, I guess, we saw computer stuff on the 



DAVID BLACKSBERG 

ground, and we just watched and heard people jumping. 

Someone said, "There's somebody that's still 
moving. Somebody is alive." I also saw a dog that was 
tied up in front of the building, and I approached. I 
got hit with some debris, so I decided not to go, so I 
had a lot of people that were walking. I said let me 
take care of them, because I know I can help them. 

I did that, and in a couple of minutes or so 
a couple of units started approaching, and I told them 
where we had set up staging because they were also 
lost, so I was standing on the corner of West, of 
Westside Highway, and I guess just over by 2 World 
Financial . 

Q. Did you see any officers, captains, chiefs? 

A. Not for awhile. Not for awhile. I didn't 
see a chief, and then a chief came -- I believe he was 
a fire chief. I told him what we had, and he just took 
off. He said, "Okay, I'll notify whoever." I said, 
"Okay fine." Then another chief came, an EMS chief. 

Q. Who was that? 

A. I don't know his name. I don't remember. I 
took so many names down, and then it was just so busy. 
It was really chaotic. When the chief came, I told him 
what I had, and what was going on and what I had 



DAVID BLACKSBERG 

already done, and I already took down all the names of 
all the vehicles that had approached, and he didn't 
seem really to care what was going on. 



Finally, we said -- okay, we parked our 
vehicles, and everything was clustered, and people 
everywhere, so finally we got some water. 

Q. That's when I showed up. 

A. Yes, that is when 32 boy had showed up, right 
when we started to get our vehicles set up. 

Q. This is after the first building collapsed 
or -- 

A. Still before. 

Q. This still — 

A. Still prior to the buildings coming down. We 
were still there watching and hearing people jump, and 
patients were still approaching. We had cleaned up, 
you know, staged our vehicles by the water, so that if 
an emergency did happen that we could take off or we 
could take as many patients as possible. 

There was, I guess, a fire started getting 
really bad, and a lot of stuff -- well, it was already 



DAVID BLACKSBERG 

bad, but we just stood by and watched people jump. 
Pretty much that's all we could do is just watch and 
listen, listen to our radios and see what would happen. 

Q. Radio communication was okay? There was no 
problem with that, other than the chaos on the radio? 

A. There was -- it was -- I guess it was all 
right because once they decided what was going to 
happen, because they -- finally they said that all -- 
all bosses would go on to citywide and everybody else 
goes onto Manhattan South. I was finally able to hear 
that, but they obviously didn't hear me say anything 
about where I was setting up staging, or didn't want to 
hear it or anything like that, and so we were overcome 
with so many people. 

Once the vehicles were all set up for, I 
guess, a new staging area that we had set up over 
there, it was all set up. We just sat and watched, had 
people coming to us, and next thing you know, we 
started hearing -- just actually, there was a lot of 
rumors that a third plane was going to come in, so we 
were standing by looking up, listening. There was no 
third plane. The building started coming down. 

Q. Was your vehicle still on the pedestrian 
walkway? 



10 
DAVID BLACKSBERG 



A. It was actually half a block up now. 

Q. Close (inaudible)? 

A. But I -- everything from when I was parked 
across the street from One Liberty, right? When I was 
originally parked from One Liberty to when I finally 
removed it and cleaned up for the staging, there was 
only a block, block and a half, so it really wasn't 
that far. It was right across the street. 

We started hearing the building, and we saw 
it tipping. It was just leaning. 

Q. You saw it leaning? 

A. Well, I looked up, and I thought I saw it 
leaning. Later on it was confirmed that it was 
leaning, and it was starting to come down, and so we 
just started booking. We ran as fast as we could, 
wherever we could. Everybody scattered all over the 
place. Nobody knew where anybody else went. 

I looked -- I ran, and a whole lot of people, 
we were all running together. I looked back, and it 
was like it was this cloud of smoke, but it was like an 
avalanche, because you could see the smoke and 
everything tumbling right at you. You couldn't see up, 
you couldn't see back, and no matter how fast you ran, 
you couldn't out run it, and it overtook us, and 



11 

DAVID BLACKSBERG 



finally I found my partner. 

We grabbed hands, and we just ran, and then 
the next thing you know, we had people grabbing my 
arm. Then they split up us, got my other arm, and my 
partner, Juan Rios, they grabbed his arms and said, 
"Where are we going?" Because it was so cloudy and 
smoky, dusty and everything else that we really didn't 
know where we were going. We just kept on running. 

Everybody was panicking, and I told them 
to -- we had babies crying, kids crying, adults not -- 
lost not knowing what to do, where to go. People are 
walking back. People are walking in circles. My 
partner and I, we were the only EMS people, fire people 
or anybody that we could see of, even PD. We didn't 
know where anybody went. Calling on our radio to find 
out where everybody is. Nothing. Everybody is over 
the radio, so you couldn't do anything. 

Finally, we told people to cover their mouths 
with the T-shirts if they had, cover their mouths with 
their arms. People just wanted to sit down and do 
nothing. There was papers and the smell and everything 
else that was in the smoke that we didn't know about, 
you know, and the dust. We had them cover -- keep 
their heads down. People were closing their eyes while 



12 
DAVID BLACKSBERG 



grabbing onto us. We had a whole chain link of people. 

Q. All this chain link, was it all EMS people? 

A. It was just my partner and I that were EMS, 
fire or PD. Just the two of us, and we started talking 
to people, trying to calm them down. 

Q. Civilians? 

A. They were all civilians, and actually quite a 
few of them were from 1 World Trade. They were from -- 
I don't know. One girl was telling me she was from the 
63rd Floor, and another one was telling me she was from 
the 84th, and then there was other people, too. I 
don't remember what floors they told me from, but I 
remember these two, and they told me that they ran 
down, and I see they were still wearing high heels. 
How in the world are you running with these shoes on? 
So you kind of had to joke around a little bit, even 
though it wasn't really a joking situation, but you had 
to calm everybody down. Especially myself, you know. 
So I kind of used that to calm myself down and 
everybody else, joking around as we were walking now, 
because once you ran and the smoke and everything 
caught up to you, there was no use running, because 
it's already caught up, and you're already breathing 
the stuff in. 



13 
DAVID BLACKSBERG 



Q. Did you get blown into something, or did you 
duck under the buses or -- 

A. We had finally found a couple of city buses 
that were just parked just before Battery Park. 

Q. Battery Park City? 

A. Yeah, we ran. Well, it felt like a lot 
anyway. 

Q. This is going towards the Battery Tunnel 

A. Okay, so we are down here by the park. We 
ran all the way down to the park. I can't tell you 
what you route we took, because we just -- 

Q. I don't think you really care. 

A. Because we just kept going around, no. 

We went by Battery Park, and we saw two city 
buses there, and I told them to get on, and they said, 
"Where are the buses going?" Everybody's asking where 
the buses are going. I said, "Doesn't matter, as long 
as, you know, you're sitting here, and you are away 
from everything else. Doesn't matter where the buses 
are going. Right now, doesn't look like they're going 
anywhere." Everybody is worried about where they were 
going. I said, "Well, the air is cleaner in here. 
It's going to be dirty, but it's cleaner in here than 
it is outside . " 



14 
DAVID BLACKSBERG 



At that time, we still didn't have masks. 
Nobody had masks. Finally we sat everybody in there. 
My partner and I went back out trying to find more 
people. A lot of babies, a lot of kids, adults. We 
told them all where to go. We were directing as many 
people as we could find that were lost. 

Finally, we found two more EMS people, but 
they weren't working for the Fire Department. They 
worked for a private company. I think it was Cabrini, 
but I'm not positive. 

Q. Building 2 still didn't go down yet? 

A. At that time, we had no idea what was going 
on, because we were running, and we just heard the 
first building coming down, so I lost track of time of 
when the second building was coming down. It sounded 
like one big rumble, and then it just sounded like it 
just continued, and I was -- I wasn't really paying 
attention. I was looking at the sound. I was looking 
at the smoke and everything. I was listening to the 
people that were screaming. I didn't really hear 
another building coming down, so we ended up going into 
the park, getting people to come down and standing by 
the water, because there was a little bit of a clearing 
down there, and everybody standing by the water. We 



15 
DAVID BLACKSBERG 



were standing by the water. 

We were trying to go over our radios trying 
to find out if there was another staging area near us. 
I don't know how much longer that we found out, but it 
was quite a bit longer, a couple of hours, and now it 
felt like a couple of minutes, but now I know it was 
probably an hour or two. 

We found out that there was staging right at 
the Staten Island Ferry Terminal, which was half a 
block away. 

Q. That is half a mile away. 

A. When we started walking, it felt like it was 
closer, you know. I was just happy to see other 
people, I guess. 

Q. That's good. 

A. When we were still at the water, at the park, 
we flagged down a fire chief. Actually ended up being 
an EMS chief. I don't know his name. I don't know. 

Q . It's okay. 

A. I wasn't really thinking about taking down 
names, and we just set up over there, and there was 
carts inside, inside the park, the vendors that sell 
the water, and food and everything. Everybody was just 
taking water, trying to wash out their eyes, wash out 



16 
DAVID BLACKSBERG 



their throats. 

Nobody could breathe. Everything was stuck 
in their throats, and their eyes, mouths, faces and 
everything, so we were taking water, washing everybody 
as much as we could, because we didn't have any 
equipment, my partner and I, and there was no ambulance 
there, nothing, except for the command vehicle, and 
they didn't have much either. So we took whatever we 
could. A couple of boats started to show up, and we 
just put people on the boats, and everybody was worried 
about where they were going. 

Q. You took injured people or -- 

A. Injured, noninjured, all civilians, but both 
injured and noninjured, both going onto the boats. 
Everybody was worried about where it was going. 

They were going to Ellis Island, Jersey City 
and Staten Island. Those were the three places I 
remember the boats going. We were putting people on 
the boats. I told them it didn't matter where it was 
going. You'll always find a way home, and people were 
saying, "I just live a block away." I told them, "I 
guarantee you, you are not going to be allowed to go 
back in your apartment at least for a day, two days. 
If you are lucky, it will be two days." 



17 
DAVID BLACKSBERG 



Finally we started kicking everybody -- not 
really kicking them, but telling them, pushing them 
onto the boat and telling them to go. I told them they 
had no choice. There really was no choice for them. 
They had to go, so everybody was going on. I said, 
"Where do you live?" This is the closest one. 
Brooklyn would be the closest. Staten Island would be 
the closest, or Jersey City, wherever they lived, just 
get on. 

Finally, people started getting onto the 
boats, and we were actually trying to find another -- 
another EMS person, and I -- he worked for the Fire 
Department. We went and found a fire truck, took the 
fire hose and a wrench, because we thought we had seen 
a hydrant, but there was none, because we were trying 
to get some water to wash the stuff down and try to 
clean up, but there was nothing there, and next thing 
you know, everybody was walking -- there was another -- 
somebody had gone back and got an ambulance, so at that 
time there was a fire chief, no lieutenants, and about 
six EMTs from the Fire Department, and we were pretty 
much doing everything down at the water over there. 

Then we walked over -- once we found out -- 
once we got everybody onto the boats, cleared that 



DAVID BLACKSBERG 

whole section off with the pedestrians and civilians, 
we went over to the Staten Island Ferry Terminal. 
That's where we found out that a lot of people were 
going, and that was one of the main staging areas. 

They started setting it up like a makeshift 
hospital there. People were coming down from the Trade 
Centers, being transported, and then we triaged them 
over there, and they were put onto the Staten Island 
Ferry and shipped over to Staten Island where I guess 
there was more EMTs over there. 

Finally, there was really nothing much going 
on. People were coming in, but not steadily, and my 
partner and I felt useless. We were like, what are we 
doing here? There is nothing going on, nobody coming 
now. At that time there was nobody coming for maybe 20 
minutes, it could have been longer. I lost track of 
time the whole day. The whole day felt like it was 
five minutes long. 

We said there is nothing going on here. We 
made sure our names were on the list, because there was 
a lieutenant taking names on a list. 
Q. EMS lieutenant? 

A. EMS lieutenant at the Staten Island ferry, so 
I made sure our name was on the list. I wanted 



19 
DAVID BLACKSBERG 



somebody to know that we were all right, you know, that 
were there. We started walking up and found out that 
we were -- that we saw some of the EMTs handing out 
masks to people that were still walking away. 

There were still dust and clouds. Everything 
was in the air and like that for a couple of weeks. We 
started handing out masks. We were walking up handing 
out masks. It felt like we were doing something 
because we -- you know, we're just sitting in there 
doing nothing. We walked up and we ended up -- it was 
a -- there was an ambulance from Midwood, and they were 
going -- they said that they were going to go up to 
ground zero. 

At that time, we didn't know what it was 
called, but they were going to go up to the area, which 
is now ground zero. We said, "All right, can we hop 
aboard with you?" And he said, "Yes, absolutely." 

We took the bus right up, took the ambulance 
up there, and we found out that staging was now at One 
Liberty, and Juan and another EMT ended up walking 
back. My partner Juan, he walked back. Rios walked 
back, and I stayed up there, because I knew Juan, and I 
knew the other guy that he was with, that also works at 
the station, they were walking back, so I knew that 



20 
DAVID BLACKSBERG 



they would be all right. They were partners, and they 
saw me going with the lieutenant and other EMTs, so we 
had split up. My partner and I split up a lot, but we 
ended up finding each other somehow. At that time he 
walked back, and I stayed. 

I had a radio. My partner lost his radio and 
his helmet, everything at the same time, so it didn't 
matter, but I knew that -- 

Q. Fine. 

A. I stayed up there, and I had a radio, and I 
was calling making sure everybody was all right. I had 
a cell phone on me, calling back and forth, and next 
thing you know we were on the rubble digging and 
getting fire, and PD and everybody else that was 
getting hurt. Meanwhile, some of us were hurting. 

Q. And this point was it towards the end -- 

A. This was actually about -- I don't know. 
Maybe three o'clock in the afternoon. I had already 
gone into overtime for me. I ended up staying until 
the next morning. I stayed. It ended up being about 
25 hours that I was there. 

I tried to get a half-hour nap, but you 
can't, because you couldn't breathe. Anyway, we had 
some mess. They were like paper. 



21 
DAVID BLACKSBERG 



Q. How did you ever get back to the station? 

A. Well, I found another EMT, and in the morning 
when we just said that we were exhausted and ready to 
come back, he said, "You can walk to the Brooklyn 
Bridge and come back" and I said, "Well, I know that 
there is a vehicle down at the Staten Island Ferry, 
because that was mine." Somebody had moved it earlier 
in the day, and I had the key, so I said, "If we're 
lucky, the ambulance is still there. I know I still 
have my key on me." 

He said, "All right, let's try it." We got 
down there, and the bus is still there, but there was 
all this soot and papers and everything still on the 
vehicle and inside. We were wearing or masks inside 
the vehicle. I was driving maybe three miles an hour, 
and everything is blowing all over the place, and we 
finally made it back, and the next thing you know, I 
had lieutenants and everybody telling me I was missing 
for nine hours . 

I called them. I spoke to them, but I guess 
in the chaos, nobody really knew where I was or what 
was going on, but I ended up making it back, and I'm 
all right. We still felt like -- I mean, I still feel 
like I didn't do enough. I know I did a lot. 



22 
DAVID BLACKSBERG 



Q. A catastrophe like that, I don't think 
anybody can actually feel they did enough, you know, so 
much going on, so, you know. You were there for 25 
hours . 

A. We were hands on the whole time. We were 
doing something, or we walked around or we were helping 
out whereever we could. We had those power bars that 
ended up making their way up. Next thing you know, I 
know people were having hot meals. I don't think I 
could have eaten at that time. I wasn't able to eat 
anyway for a long time. 

Q. We want to thank for you your cooperation in 
this . 

A. Thank you. 

MR. DUN: The time is 6:18, and that's going 

to be the end of interview. 



File No. 9110135 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
FRANK PASTOR 
Interview Date: October 23, 2001 



Transcribed by Maureen McCormick 



MR. DUN: Today is October 23, 2001. The 
time is 6:25 a.m. hours, and this is Richard Dun 
of New York City Fire Department, working with 
Marissa Abbriano. We are conducting an interview 
with -- 

MR. PASTOR: FRANK PASTOR, EMT D, from 
Battalion 31. 

Q. At this time, we would like to -- of the New 
York City Fire Department. At this time, we'd like you 
to describe the events on September 11. 

A. Okay. September 11, that Monday morning, I 
reported to work. I came to the station, and let me 
just say this, the lieutenants here still break my 
chops, because that morning I came in, and I said to 
them, "I think we are going to be busy today." And 
they said to me, "Why?" I says, "Well, it's going to 
be 9-11," and from thereon -- I remember our normal 
routine in the morning, go get our breakfast, and we go 
sit and we cover Red Hook, so we had the view of the 
city. We were sitting there, and we were looking at 
the city. All of is sudden my partner says to me, 
"Frankie, that plane seems to be low." 

Q. What unit were you working that day? 

A. We were working 32 boy in Red Hook. We had 



FRANK PASTOR 

the view of the city, and she yells out, "Frank, that 
plane just hit the building." 

Q. Who is she? 

A. My partner is Mala, Mala Harilal, and I look 
up, and I can't believe what I'm seeing. I get on the 
radio, and I said, "32 boy, if you need us, we're 
available. We can go right through the tunnel." As 
soon as I seen this, I got on the phone, and I dialed 
the number to call my wife to let her know what's going 
on. We were standing there in awe. We can't believe 
what's going on, and she says -- and I remember my 
partner, Mala, saying again to me, "That other plane is 
low." I don't know how much time, 10, 15 minutes, and 
we seen the other plane hit. 

Q. You're still in Brooklyn? 

A. We were still in Brooklyn. They haven't 
called us. Now they say, "32 boy you're going." I 
back up the vehicle. We start heading towards the 
tunnel. We hit the tunnel. In the tunnel, we're 
stuck, and I can feel the tunnel vibrating. I'm aware 
it's already chaotic. 

We don't know why we are stuck in the middle, 
but in front of me there is a big ESU truck. I look 
behind me. There is an ESU truck behind me. They are 



FRANK PASTOR 

blowing their horns. We can't see nothing, but we were 
in a standstill. What's going on? The problem is that 
you have the three lanes coming out or going in, and 
only one coming out. They're stopping traffic so we 
can get through. 

As soon as I get on the other side of the 
west side -- I'm the driver. I come out of the tunnel, 
and I just see -- I told my partner, "I just saw 
somebody's torso on the floor," and my partner said, 
"No, you're kidding." I says, "It's not a dog." I 
thought it was a dog, but I saw a torso with no arms 
and no legs, just split open on the driver's side. 

I go through. Guys are flying by. Emergency 
vehicles are flying by, so I see that -- I see which is 
31 David's ambulance over towards the west side. I 
pull over, which I believe is going to be the first 
staging area. We didn't know at the time if it was or 
not . 

I remember pulling over to the left. I saw 
that they're underneath this walkway, and I put the 
ambulance -- I saw their ambulance underneath the 
walkway, which at the time it seemed to be a good idea, 
because there's debris, there's stuff falling. I 
remember seeing a computer coming out the window and 



FRANK PASTOR 

hitting the ground, breaking the windows. 

We don't know what's going on. I pulled the 
bus over behind them, and I look up, and I'm saying -- 
you got this gut feeling saying we don't belong here. 
We' re too close. 

Q. The two buildings were still standing? 

A. The two buildings are standing. There's 
flames coming everywhere, so I said, "You know what?" 
I told my partner, Mala, "Let's get suited up," and we 
gotta go. 

Q. What do you mean suited up? 

A. Get our equipment. 

Q. Turnout coats? 

A. Turnout coats, everything. I remember 
putting on my bulletproof -- I have the outer 
carrier on the bulletproof vest. I remember putting 
that on, and I remember putting my helmet. 

I saw 31 David. They're treating somebody in 
that first area underneath the walkway. There is stuff 
hitting the overpass, and I run over to them. I said, 
"Guys, I'll be right back. We're going to have to 
move these vehicles. We got to get out of here." 

I remember running back to where we think -- 
they're parked underneath this walkway here at this 



FRANK PASTOR 

time. 

Q. Liberty Street walkway? 

A. Liberty Street -- or no, I -- yeah, this one 
here. There's debris falling on it. The windows are 
shattering. So I said, "I'll be right back. I'm going 
to go find a commanding officer, and we have to get out 
of here." 

I remember seeing a lot of Hatzolah 
ambulances. There was a couple of EMS ambulances, a 
lot of private ambulances gathered in that corner. So 
I turned around, and I ran over. I remember seeing 
Captain Frank D'Amato. He was the one -- I said, 

"Captain, we have to get these vehicles out of here." 
He's looking at me, and he says to me, "You're in 
charge of taking all these vehicles and getting them 
out of here. " 

There had to be 10, 15 vehicles. I says, 
"Okay." Now all the equipment is out. Everybody has 
all the equipment out. Stretchers are out. We have to 
put everything back in. What it seems to me eternity, 
we moved the buses another half a block up. 

As we moved the buses up, I'm coming back. 
He said, "And make sure everybody comes back with the 
equipment. We're going to start a staging area." 



FRANK PASTOR 

Seems to me that they're going to start detouring us 
towards the building, going closer towards the World 
Trade. 

It must have took us, I would say by the time 
we moved the last vehicle, half an hour, 40 minutes, 
would have seemed to me, pulling the vehicles down and 
getting all the equipment. That's when we hear, "It's 
coming down. It's coming down." We didn't even have a 
chance to turn around. 

The cloud is coming down, and we get buried. 
I remember being in the dark on the floor. I remember 
getting on my Nextel, calling my wife back, telling her 
I'm okay. "I can't see. I can't see my hand in front 
of my face, but I'm okay." 

We must have been in the debris --it didn't 
clear for about half an hour, 45 minutes. I remember 
running into Battery Park in the -- everybody is 
running, people falling. I remember falling down. I 
remember I lost my helmet. I didn't know where I was. 

I remember running into a lobby in the 
financial district somewhere. I was the only EMS 
personnel in there with a bunch of women and children 
crying, and people saying to me, "Help me, help me. We 
can't breathe." I had no equipment. All I had was my 



FRANK PASTOR 

pouch. I remember I had a bottle of water with me, and 
I had it in my pocket, and I remember doing this 
clearing my face, people are coming up to me in the 
lobby, saying, "Help me, help me. I can't breathe. I 
can't breathe." I'm looking around to see what I can 
do. 

I remember opening up this door. There was a 
slop sink. There was clothes hanging. I took the 
clothes, and I started soaking the clothes, wetting 
them, started cutting out strips, giving it to kids, 
giving it to the mothers. I must have ripped 
everybody's clothes that was hanging from people that 
work for the maintenance department. I remember being 
those gray shirts, those uniforms, cutting them all 
up. I found a watering --a plant. What do you call 
those? 

Q. Watering can. 

A. People were coming to me, dousing everybody. 
I'm taking control of the bathroom, because it's 
chaotic. I can't let nobody in there because it's 
going to be -- they are fighting for water. They're 
lining up for me. I'm cleaning them off, giving them 
rags, cleaning them off. 

I'm looking at the door. You can't fit 



FRANK PASTOR 

nobody more in the lobby. There had to be 500, 600 
people in the lobby. 

Q. What lobby are you talking about? 

A. I remember running. I'm in here, so we 
were --at first we were here. I moved the buses down 
the block here. When we moved the buses further down 
in here somewhere -- 

Q. Gateway Plaza? 

A. Yeah. These guys were here at one time. 
Then we moved them here. Then we finally got them all 
down like another block and a half away. This is, I 
think, Albany Street and South End. 

Q. South End Avenue and Albany. 

A. Okay, somewhere in here, and the reason I 
know that because I've gone back to ground zero a 
couple of times and I remember saying this is where I 
ran. This is where I remember running. 

In here somewhere I remember going into a 
lobby. That's where we started soaking the people up 
and giving them stuff. I must have been in the lobby 
half an hour. Everything seems to me like half an 
hour, an hour. I remember people gathering around me 
because the radio is still on, and that's the way they 
can hear communications. Safety, I guess. 



10 

FRANK PASTOR 



They were all gathering. I said let me lower 
this, and I have to try to get out of here. As I tried 
to get out, they were blocking the door and said, "You 
can't leave us." I finally managed to go back out, and 
I'm walking back towards the green. Everybody is 
coming. I don't see no EMS personnel still. 
Q. Did you see fire personnel? 
A. When we started going, I lost my partner. I 
remember running into three fire zebra, a unit, and 
they had Scott packs. The HAZ-TAC unit, and I know the 
guys. I remember seeing Joe, and I seen Eric, and I 
said to Joe, "Joe, give me some --" He gave me some 
oxygen. I was covered completely. 

I remembered taking my helmet off and putting 
the flaps down when I was running, but I remember stuff 
hitting me, but then I lost my helmet, so now I got my 
head full of plaster, after doing all this. I remember 
running into the guys. They gave me oxygen, and as I'm 
walking back, I see on the floor stumbling Chief 
Grant. He's got a non-rebreather on, no 0-2, no 
nothing. He's just stumbling on the floor, and I grab 
him, and I pick him up, and he says to me, "What do I 
tell these people?" 

People are still running. The flames are 



11 

FRANK PASTOR 



still coming around that bend. When you walked down 
Battery Park, there seems to be a bend. It seems to be 
like when you're going to walk back towards the World 
Trade Center. He said, "Keep them going. Keep them 
going. Keep them walking," but it seems to me we were 
walking back towards the area. 

I remember telling him we can't go that way. 
He says, "What do you mean? What do I tell these 
people?" I says, "We're going to have to stay here." 
We were in a grassy area. I remember being on the 
grass, and I look over, and I thought it was an 
ambulance. 

I lost my footing, but it's a fire boat with 
the lights on coming, and these Liberty shuttle, 
whatever you want to call it. 
Q. The ferries. 

A. The ferries. They are yelling out, "I can 
take 75. I can take 200." That's when we started 
putting the people on the boat. 

I lost Chief Grant. I lost his aide. I lost 
my partner. These guys, I don't know where they were. 
I walked back towards -- when I'm walking back towards 
the building, that's when I ran into more EMS 
personnel. 



12 
FRANK PASTOR 



Q. This is after both buildings came down. 
A. Well, we didn't know it was two. We didn't 
know that both of them came down. We remember hearing 
the rumble, and it seemed like it was a continuous 
rumble, so we didn't know if it was one, or two or 
three. We didn't know. 

We found out that it was both after when we 
walked back towards the area that we didn't see nothing 
standing, just the mountain of dust and debris. 

Just walking back towards the area, now you 
start seeing personnel. I remember seeing people 
coming back with water, EMS equipment, and that's when 
we just got together and started walking towards the 
ferry, and that's where we spent the whole day. 
That's pretty much the whole story. 
MR. DUN: I want to thank you for your 
interview, Frank, and your cooperation. 

At this time, the time is 637 hours, and this 
ends the interview with Frank. 



File No. 9110136 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

BRIAM SMITH 

Interview Date: October 23, 2001 



Transcribed by Maureen McCormick 



BRIAM SMITH 

MR. DUN: Today is October 23, 2001. The 

time is 813 hours. 

I am Richard Dun, New York City Fire 

Department, working with Marisa Abbriano, also New 

York City Fire Department. We are conducting an 

interview with -- 

MR. SMITH: BRIAM SMITH, EMT, 5480. 

Q. Brian, can you describe the events or things 
that happened on September 11? 

A. Yes. Tell you the story now? 

Q. Right. 

A. You want me to follow this thing? 

Q. You know, just go through it, and if you 
remember things, you know. 

A. Initially, we -- like I said it before, we 
had gotten off of duty at quarter of nine. I was going 
out to my vehicle to drive home, and we -- my partner 
and I saw the -- right after the first tower had been 
hit, and so we came back inside, and we told them. It 
hadn't even gone over the radios yet, because initially 
he didn't -- he thought that we just -- 

Q. So you actually saw the first plane go in? 

A. I heard the explosion and looked up, and then 
I saw it start to billow out. 



BRIAM SMITH 

So I came back inside, and I told my 
lieutenant, Lieutenant McCarthy -- he was the desk 
lieutenant -- and I told him I was going to go inside 
and get changed, put my uniform back on, because I was 
in my civilian clothes, and that we needed an extra 
unit, and we need to go back out, and, like I said, he 
initially didn't believe us, but then a couple of 
seconds later they came over the air with the 
announcement, you know, "Units, an MCI has been 
announced the Borough of Manhattan, " so on and so 
forth. 

So I went inside. I got changed into my 
uniform real quick, very quickly and very sloppily, I 
might add, but we went back into the office. I grabbed 
keys. My partner was outside. He was checking the 
back of the ambulance, because he was going to be 
teching, he's not evoced, so he was in the back, and he 
was going through all the stuff to make sure that we 
had what we needed just to get out on the road. Went 
in and logged on the computer right away. 

Before I left, my lieutenant told me that we 
were going to be 31 Mary, and if they needed us, they'd 
call us, so we got on. I logged on right away and told 
them that we were the next unit available if they 



BRIAM SMITH 

needed us, and they told us to proceed to the MCI in 
Manhattan . 

So we left the parking lot, and we started 
going over the Brooklyn Bridge, and we made it down 
that -- it was heavy traffic, but normal Tuesday 
morning traffic, but right by the foot of the bridge, 
it was pretty congested, but with vehicle traffic. I 
guess because they -- the police had shut down all the 
vehicle traffic going over -- to allow pedestrian 
traffic there, I guess going over the bridge, so 
everybody was bottled up, but I was able to drive up on 
the sidewalk a little bit and make my way to the 
bridge, and they just waved us right through, so we 
were going over the bridge, and when we were -- when we 
initially left out of the station, central gave us a 
cross street to stage. They gave us a spot where they 
said they were going to have EMS staging, but again, 
like I said earlier, I'm not very familiar with lower 
Manhattan. I don't know the street names or, you know, 
it's not like upper Manhattan where there are numbers, 
and that's easy. It's a little tougher down on the low 
side if you don't really know your way around. 

So my partner was trying to look at the 
Hagstrom's and trying to figure out, you know, where we 



BRIAM SMITH 

were going, and, like I said, going over the bridge 
there was no other traffic besides us, and the both of 
us were, like, looking out enroute to the alarm. We 
see the -- at this point only the one tower was hit, 
and there was all kinds of stuff coming out of it. 
Looks like paper, and it's smoking, and we were going 
over the bridge, and again, like I said, my partner, he 
couldn't -- we couldn't figure out exactly where we had 
to go once we got off the bridge, so there was an 
unmarked police car coming up behind us. He had the 
light going, and I said, you know, just follow this 
guy. He's got to be heading to the same place. 

So we -- so I said all right I'll just follow 
him in. I followed him in. I got off the bridge. We 
circled around, and we started heading in this 
direction, I guess west. I don't know what street we 
ended up on, because I don't really know where it drops 
you off when you get off the bridge, but all I know we 
ended up somewhere down, like, I guess, in this 
vicinity because where we initially stopped when we 
were heading south, you could see down here. 

I mean, it was -- you know, there must have 
been a crossing somewhere, because you could see there 
is, like, a foot bridge or something somewhere around 



BRIAM SMITH 

here, and you could see the tower. No, it was right 
here. I think it was Cortlandt or one of these 
streets. I don't really know. 

So we had stopped because you could tell once 
you got close there was thousands of people in the 
street, you know, like they were everywhere. 

Again, I mean, all we wanted to do was find 
out where we had to be staged and where they were going 
to set up the EMS staging, and we got flagged by a 
MetroCare unit, and they said that, yeah, some guy's 
having a heart attack. He had like a 

self-def ibrillator, and it's, like, you know, it had 
def ibrillated him six times, and I guess they thought 
that we were an ALS unit, because I told them -- I 
said, "Listen, we are just another BLS unit. You know, 
we can't do anything more than you guys can. We can't 
tie up two ambulances and four EMTs with one guy having 
a heart attack. I mean, you know, who the heck knows 
what the heck is going on over there." 

While all this is going on -- and again, I 
only know this because of how many times I kind of 
replayed it and trying to fit everything into the time 
of events . 

The second plane has to hit either as we are 



BRIAM SMITH 

getting off the Brooklyn Bridge or just as we are 
meeting that throng of people, because by the time that 
we get down to Liberty Street, the second tower is 
already hit, and, like I said, going over the bridge, 
only the one tower was hit. So, I mean, it must have 
happened in just, you know, that minute or so that we 
made our way over to Manhattan. 

Like I said, there were a lot of people, and 
we could see the trade center. Again, like I say, I'm 
kind of confused by the whole layout. As many times as 
I look at this map -- this is actually one of the best 
maps that I've seen so far, but we start making our way 
down, and we ended up a couple of blocks away from the 
trade center when there was -- like, it looked, like a 
court building or something on the right-hand side as 
you are going down Liberty, and because there's steps 
going up, and there was some police there, and there 
was a fire truck. 

Q. Maybe that was Liberty Plaza. 

A. It might have been. I don't know. 

Q. Liberty Plaza is right here. 

A. That might have been it. Do you know if 
there were steps over here? 

Q. Yeah, there's steps. Black marblite, a dark 



BRIAM SMITH 

color building? 

A. Yeah. I think that's it. Might have been 
this . 

Q. So you were on Liberty and Church, Trinity? 

A. Liberty and Trinity. 

Q. Which turns into Church. 

A. Right. So we are -- like I said, I'm kind of 
guessing, but we were basically, like, right here, and 
there is a -- I think it was a sergeant or a 
lieutenant, I don't recall, but he was directing some 
kind of traffic. I think he had a helmet on, but I 
stopped, and we asked him. I said, "You know, 
sergeant, do you know where they are setting up 
staging?" And he tried calling on the radio, and he 
tried, and it was so much radio traffic at that point. 

Like I said, it was bedlam, you know, at that 
point. It was just, you know, crazy. Nobody really 
had a clear sense of what the heck was going on. In 
fact, when we were going over the bridge we were 
hearing reports on the radio that after the first tower 
had been hit, we heard that it was a plane that hit 
it. We heard that two planes hit at the same time. We 
didn't know if a bomb went off. We didn't know exactly 
what was going on. It wasn't like you could see a wing 



BRIAM SMITH 

sticking out of the building. You know, it wasn't 
anything obvious . 

So we went to -- we were there, and the guy 
said to us -- he said "Listen, I don't know where they 
are setting up staging, but I haven't seen any 
ambulances down this way, and I know that there is -- 
that they have some people that are hurt at the 10-10 
house, " and he said, "No ambulances or anything down 
there, so, you know, maybe you could do something over 
there. " 

So I said, "All right, we'll go down there." 
So we went down. We went up to the 10-10 house. As 
soon as we got there, we backed in the engine bay, like 
you guys have seen where it is, so if you are looking 
at the front of the building it's the engine bay on the 
left, and there was a captain there, one of the fire 
captains. He wasn't in turnout, but I said to him, 
"Cap, listen, you know --" because, like, he was 
captain at the house there. I don't know if he was 
from Ladder 10 or from Engine 10, but we backed it in, 
and the guy said, "Yeah, we got a bunch of people 
injured in here, seven or eight people, some of them 
hurt pretty bad. If you guys want to grab a couple of 
people and run." 



10 
BRIAM SMITH 



I said, "All right. Let me get out a take a 
look, " and the guy said, "Just make sure you back it 
all the way in, because there was a lot of debris, and 
there is a lot of stuff going over the building." 

Like I said, by this point, Two World Trade 
Center is on fire. You know, like you can look all the 
ways up to the top, you know, I mean, there's quite a 
bit of damage up there. Like I said, the second plane 
had already hit it. 

Q. People jumping at that point? 

A. Not when I first got out of the ambulance. 
They were plenty of jumpers to come, but not at that 
point. If there had been, you know, like I said, I 
didn't notice. 

Q. Was there a lot of debris when you were 
pulling up into the firehouse? 

A. Yes. 

Q. You saw a lot of debris? 

A. A lot of debris on the street. All the ways 
over here. 

Q. All the way up to Church? 

A. Yeah. I mean, I wasn't crazy. It wasn't 
like I had -- I mean, I could drive through it, but, I 
mean, I had, you know, to kind of go around a couple of 



11 

BRIAM SMITH 



bigger pieces of debris. 

So we backed into the firehouse, and we got 
out, you know, after a quick assessment of how many 
patients were in there. I kind of guesstimated by how 
much time had passed from the initial incident. I 
mean, again, like I said, coming over, only because I'm 
not really familiar with the way the things are set up, 
I thought that this tower right here is the tower that 
I saw burning on the way in. I don't know that it's 
this tower burning, because when you look at the bottom 
and you look up, it's tough to get a sense of where it 
is in proportion to the top of the tower. 

So I figure maybe 20 minutes went by, 15 
minutes. Like I said, it's kind of hard to tell, 
because time is kind of like -- it was like in slow 
motion, but we got out. I got a quick assessment of 
the amount of patients in there, you know, immediately, 
and, like I said, some of them were pretty bad, so I 
said to the captain -- I said, "Cap, listen. I haven't 
seen any ambulances over here either, and what we are 
going to do is, being that everyone is going to be 
familiar with the firehouse over here, you know, we are 
just -- we will take this station over, and we are 
going to -- my partner and I are going the set the 



12 
BRIAM SMITH 



station up as a triage station, and I'm going to radio 
out to dispatch, and we'll let them know what we are 
doing, but I need a few guys to give us a hand, " and 
the guy's -- you know, he was, like, whatever you need, 
you just let us know. We will do whatever we got to 
do. And I said -- I asked him if he had anybody there 
that was medically trained. I figured there was an 
engine company there that maybe they have some CFR 
guys. He said, "I don't have anybody, no CFR, 
nothing." He's like, you know, whatever you got, you 
got . 

There was a volunteer firefighter from 
Commack on Long Island. He worked in the trade 
center. He came over, and he's, like, you know, trying 
to offer his services, I guess, and, you know, so the 
captain gave this guy to us to help out. He said the 
saying thing, like he wasn't medical or anything. Like 
he knew CPR or something. So I don't know what his 
last name is. I just know his name was Rob, but -- 

So I said to the captain -- I said, "All 
right, listen. Again, we are going to take the station 
over in the name of EMS" and I don't recall how I told 
him we were going to commandeer the station, but like I 
said, he was pretty willing to go with it. 



13 
BRIAM SMITH 



So I said to him -- I said, "I need every 
chair in the station, you know, whether kitchen chairs, 
chairs like this, you know, chairs in someone's office, 
rolling chairs. You name it. I need every single 
one. I need it set up behind the ambulance. I need it 
to look like a movie theatre. It's got to be nice and 
neat, because that's for the walking wounded as they 
start to make their way into the firehouse." 

I said, "I also need every pillow, every 
blanket and any of the mattresses that you can get from 
any of the bunks upstairs. No metal frames or nothing, 
just mattress, and we are going to take the entire 
other side of the engine bay and just lay them on the 
ground. It's got to be nice and neat, and that was 
where we were going to start putting unstable patients 
and our critical patients." 

My partner and I are going to start MCIing 
these people. We are going to start triaging them. So 
we did. Like I said, some of the patients were -- some 
of them were, you know, hurt not too bad. I mean, you 
know, like, injuries that were significant, but nothing 
life-threatening. Some bad lacerations, some -- 
Q. Walking wounded. 
A. Yeah, walking wounded kind of stuff. There 



14 
BRIAM SMITH 



were some that were worse. There was one lady who was 
burnt up pretty bad. She had her shoulder -- all the 
skin off her shoulder was burnt off. Parts of her arm, 
her leg, her hair was all burnt, and I remember her 
fingers were burnt also, and, like, when they swell up 
when you get burnt real bad. 

In fact, the guy, Rob, I said to him -- I had 
to show him how to use a ring cutter, because I had to 
cut the woman's rings off because they were swelled up 
so badly, and she was, like, in shock, you know. She 
was just sitting here like this while we were cutting 
the rings off, and I know it had to hurt, but she 
didn't -- she looked like she didn't feel a thing, and 
the plasma was just, like, dripping just off her 
finger, you know. It was -- she was burnt pretty 
good. 

So we dressed her wounds, me and this guy 
Rob. My partner -- there was an Oriental guy. His 
name was Fu, and this guy had a broken hip, at the very 
least a dislocated hip. He had a pretty significant 
hip injury. 

Q. Were there a lot of people coming into the 
firehouse looking for help? 

A. Yeah, there were a lot of civilians. There 



15 
BRIAM SMITH 



were a lot of civilians that was still just kind of 
near the front of the firehouse that weren't triaged 
yet. Like I said, we -- I mean, between the two of us 
we must have maybe got six, seven, eight triage tags 
written out, and, you know, the MCI tags, and put on 
people. I mean, name, injury, and then we rated them, 
pulled the tag off at the bottom. 

So we went to -- while we were doing that, 
like I said, this guy, the Oriental guy with the broken 
hip, I showed my partner real quick how to immobilize 
it with a KED, so he immobilized -- he started to 
immobilize the fracture with a fireman. The other 
fireman set up the chairs behind the ambulance, started 
setting up the blankets and everything else. 

Q. At this time, the buildings were still 
standing? 

A. Yeah, they were still standing, and it's a 
shame. If the buildings didn't come down, you know, I 
know that some, you know, some EMS captain or chief 
would have walked by and said, damn, this is a nice 
triage station. I mean, it was looking pretty sharp. 

So to answer, I guess, next question. That's 
where we parked our apparatus, and we didn't really get 
too much in the way of civilian reports, but, like I 



16 
BRIAM SMITH 



said, I spoke initially to that captain. He gave us 
some firefighters to work with. He was sending guys 
outside, and at this point is when I started seeing 
jumpers, because the civilians that were still out by 
the front were screaming, "Oh, my God, my God, " and 
then I walked out to the front of the firehouse, and 
then they were just, you know, hit, you know, just 
coming off the building, and, you know, hitting the 
ground maybe 2 feet away, whatever it was. 

So I said all right. I got to go back 
inside, and I told the captain also to let any of the 
firemen know, because they were all up and down the 
street. They were everywhere, and I said to him, "Cap, 
listen, just tell your men, tell anybody else that 
walks past the firehouse that the 10-10 house is being 
set up as a triage station. This way, if they run in 
to any civilians out on the street, they can direct 
them this way. We can at least triage them real quick 
and then, you know, once they start rolling ambulances 
and stuff, we can start getting people taken care of." 

So they started letting everybody out on the 
street know that the 10-10 house was going to be set up 
as triage, and we -- and shortly thereafter, there were 
a couple of firefighters that came into the station, 



17 
BRIAM SMITH 



and they said that there was a brother that was hurt 
out on the street pretty bad. He had been hit in the 
head with a piece of falling debris, and that he was -- 
you know, that he was in bad shape, and they -- 
initially the guys weren't -- like, I guess, word of 
mouth was just getting around, and they didn't know 
where he was, so that the captain was like, all right, 
let's figure out where we are going to send you guys, 
and once they -- once we had a general vicinity, they 
just kept pointing down Liberty, like down in this 
direction . 

Q. To the west? 

A. Yeah, to the west. That captain said, "All 
right, you know --" again, we were just trying to get a 
sense of where it was. So I grabbed two firefighters. 
There was a Stokes basket laying on the ground. I 
said, "Guys, grab the Stokes. Come with me." 

I grabbed my tech bag, told my partner that I 
was going out to go get this guy and initially, like my 
partner, he got kind of frantic. He was like, you 
know, I'm not leaving you, I'm not leaving you, but I 
said, "You know, just sit tight. I got to go out, and 
I got to see if there is somebody out there. I'm going 
to bring him right back in. Don't worry about it. 



BRIAM SMITH 

I'll be all right. " 

So I went out and I started heading down west 
on Liberty, and again, like I said to this point, I 
don't know anything as far as, you know, plane or 
anything else. 

Q. Did you ever try communicating to CB that you 
were doing this at the 10-10? 

A. Yeah, yeah, central dispatcher, yeah. 

Q. You notified them? 

A. Sure, sure. I let them know pretty much 
every step of the way. 

Q. Okay. 

A. I called them up, and, I mean, I didn't tell 
them that I was going on the street, but I told them, 
you know, I told my partner that I was heading out and, 
you know, I let them know we were setting up the triage 
station at the 10-10 house. 

So we -- I started heading down West on 
Liberty with two firefighters, and again people were -- 
people were still, you know, leaping out of the 
building 20 feet away, whatever it was, and they were 
-- you know, you had to walk like this, because they 
were landing so close, and there was still a lot of 
stuff falling from the building. There was a lot of 



19 
BRIAM SMITH 



debris on the street, but, again, like the whole point 
I don't really see any -- there is not a big wing or 
anything hanging out. For all I know, someone, you 
know, hid a bomb on the 80th Floor, blew it up, and, 
you know, I'm just seeing the remnants of everything 
that's going on. We don't have any specifics. 

Q. You don't have to follow that. Just keep 
going . 

A. Okay. So we started heading down trying to 
find this guy, and, again, like I said, there was 
firefighters all over the street, there were guys 
everywhere, and the first indication that I had that it 
was a plane crash, I remember -- because I'm color 
blind so it's hard for me to distinguish different 
colors, especially when everything is gray, because it 
had -- really had kind of a gray look to it, because of 
all the dust, you know, but there was like a bank or 
something here, and there's like a fountain, I guess, 
right in front of the bank. 

I'm trying to remember everything in that 20 
seconds I'm going past it, but I remember there was 
life jackets everywhere, the yellow in-flight life 
jackets, and that the contrast of the yellow against 
all the gray, you know. It stood out. It was easy for 



20 
BRIAM SMITH 



me to pick it out, and I remember thinking as I saw 
that, you know, I guess it must have been a plane 
crash, because where the hell else would you get a 
bunch of yellow life jackets in the middle of 
Manhattan, you know. 

So, yeah, and I looked on the ground to see 
if there was anything around, and I didn't see 
anything, so I thought, you know, maybe it was an empty 
plane, who knows, but we started going a little further 
down. Like I said, it was a long walk before we 
started getting to where this guy was. I've been down 
there since, because I went down there on one of the 
family trips the Fire Department had, and I tried, you 
know -- they got that platform up there? 

Q. Yes. 

A. I tried to see from there to where the 10-10 
house is, and I'm trying to figure out how far down I 
went, because, like I said, I tried -- 

Q. Did you go into the Westside Highway? 

A. No, no, no. 

Q. That's a big multiple highway, so -- 

A. Okay. No, no, no. I definitely never left 
Liberty Street. I just don't know how far. 

Q. You went down a block or two maybe. 



21 
BRIAM SMITH 



A. I went down maybe a couple of blocks, and I 
remember that you have to kind of cut back a little 
bit. You have to cut back a little bit, and because 
there was a lieutenant on the street. I asked him 
where this guy was, and he said that, "He's, you know, 
down that way aways, but, you know, stay under the 
awnings. There's a lot of stuff coming down." 

And then I started walking, and I slipped, 
and I looked to see what I slipped on, and it was this 
guy's head. It was like a mush head, you know. It 
wasn't solid like a head, you know. I guess it was 
from the explosion or whatever. It was like a mush 
head. I could still see it was someone's head, and at 
that point, I took -- I tried to take note at what 
basically was on the ground around me, and then 
that's -- there was a lot of body parts there at that 
point. I mean, it was -- I mean, it literally carpeted 
the sidewalk. You couldn't tip toe through it like a 
mine field or nothing like that. You couldn't, like, 
you know, like you are dodging dog crap or something. 
I mean, it was -- basically just it was everywhere, you 
know, and I remember I -- again, I took a couple of 
seconds to take notice of what exactly it was I was 
looking at, and some of it you could tell what it was 



22 
BRIAM SMITH 



you know, some of it was identifiable and some of it, 
you knew it was from a person. You didn't know what 
the heck it was. I mean, I seen a lot of dead in MVAs , 
dismemberments and stuff, but some of it was just, you 
know, I just had no idea. I mean, just from the 
explosion and from the fall and everything else, it 
kind of, you know, turns people to mush. 

I don't know if you -- you need to know about 
the details of the bodies and stuff right? 

Q. So did you ever get to the firefighter that 
was hurt or not? 

A. When I started get to go that stuff, I saw 
down where the guy was . They pointed down to him maybe 
a hundred feet away. He was -- four firefighters 
picked him up on a long board. I mean, you could see 
his head. His head was, you know, was in bad shape. I 
don't know if this guy lived or whatever, but from 
where I was standing, from my perspective it didn't 
look too good for him, but he started running down the 
other way. He was heading down towards the Westside 
Highway on Liberty. 

So at that point I said to these two guys -- 
I said, "Listen, I don't know where he's going, if they 
have something set up down there, but let's get the 



23 
BRIAM SMITH 



hell back inside the firehouse." I said, "There's just 
too much shit falling down. We are going to get -- we 
don't want to get killed out here." 

So we started making our way back to Liberty, 
back to the 10-10 house down Liberty. We stopped at 
this corner because there were two concession stands. 
You know, the little carts that got the donuts and 
stuff in it, coffee trucks? 

There were two there, and I said to these 
guys, I said, "Hey, listen. I want to get out all the 
liquid stuff, all the water, the juice, ice tea and all 
that. I want to set up a rehab station inside the 
firehouse also, and this way we will have it set up for 
the firefighters that are going to be working there." 

I mine, when I was setting up this thing in 
the 10-10 house, I was expecting to be there like for 
24 hours. I was anticipating setting something up for 
a long-term operation, and, you know, I certainly had 
no idea that all those plans would be spoiled shortly 
thereafter, but -- and the thing is, like, with city 
firemen, these guys are funny, because it's like they 
have, like, two main things, you know. One thing is 
they just love to get like an order, like, you know, 
they just need like someone to tell them do this, do 



24 
BRIAM SMITH 



that, and so after I said this, they -- like one of the 
other favorite things they love to do is break stuff, 
and they -- both these guys put their hands on the 
cart, and they are, like, let's knock it over. 

I said "Hey, guys, whoa. There's enough 
stuff destroyed out here." There was a lock about that 
big on it, you know. Don't you have bolt cutters or 
something in the firehouse? They were, like, yeah. I 
said, "Let's go get the bolt cutters," I said. You 
know, I don't want to break anything more than is 
already broken out here. Let's, you know, let's just, 
you know, relax, try to be a little calm about this. 

So we went back in the firehouse, saw my 
partner. You know, he said, "You know, how bad is it? 
Is it bad out there?" I said, "Yeah,, it's pretty 
bad." From the time that I saw the first jumper to 
that point, there was like six, seven jumpers, plus all 
the stuff. 

Q. Your partner's name? 

A. Brian Gordon. You want his shield? 

Q. Yeah. 

A. Shield No. 5548. I know what it is, but -- 

Q. We just got a name to clarify that. 

A. Brian Gordon. 



25 
BRIAM SMITH 



So these guys grabbed the bolt cutters, and 
we ran back out to the concession stand, and it was the 
concession stand on the west side of Greenwich, I 
guess. It was right here. Like this is where the 
10-10 house is, because it was on -- there was like a 
street, because the 10-10 house is, like, on the 
corner, whatever it is, so I went back out there, cut 
the lock off the cart, opened up the door, and there 
was some milk crates in with butter and milk and stuff, 
and I threw out the milk and the butter, and filled it 
up with ice teas, Snapples and waters and stuff, gave 
it to the one guy that was with me and I said, "You 
know, take this into the firehouse. Put it against the 
wall. I'll set it up when I get in there." 

So that guy split, and I started doing the 
other one, the same thing, emptied it out, and started 
putting some stuff in there, and I heard this sound, 
and, you know, it wasn't until -- it wasn't until I saw 
the news, it wasn't until I'm able to replay events and 
where I was and what exactly was happening, because, 
like I said, as far as I know, there is only one plane 
that's hit at this point. I mean, it sounded like a 
plane coming in. It sounded like a jet engine getting 
ready to land on my head, you know, and I remember I 



26 
BRIAM SMITH 



started to hear it. 

I looked at the guy, and I said, you know, 
like, run, and we started hauling, and we started 
running down towards the 10-10 house. There was guys 
all over the street, all these guys. These guys were 
history, because -- 

Q. Civilians you are talking about? 
A. No, firefighters. There weren't all that 
many civilians. I mean, they were out there, but when 
we started running into the 10-10 house, I mean, from 
the time that I hear that first sound, to the time that 
the eventual concussion hits me, it couldn't have been 
more than four seconds, but, like, as I go through 
this, it's like slow motion, you know, like everything 
got slowed down. 

And so we started running, and the 
firefighter was ahead of me. I don't know if he was 
from Engine 10 or Ladder 10. He was from one of the 10 
companies, because he had it on his helmet, and when we 

-- by the time we got into the engine bays, they were 
completely clear. There was nobody in there. They all 
ran to the back of the building, like the kitchen area 
in there. 

The only guy that was still in there was the 



27 
BRIAM SMITH 



Oriental guy Fu, because he couldn't get up and walk, 
and this poor bastard was crawling his way to the back 
of the building, like an animal that gets his hind 
quarters run over, you know. It was horrible, and I 
remember the firefighter was running, and he ran past 
him, and I remember I thought to myself -- I said, oh, 
man, you know, now I'm going to have to stop and try to 
grab this guy, and as the sound is coming, getting 
louder and louder, you know, it really feels like it's 
about to fly in the front door of the of the fire 
house . 

Q. Talking about the second plane crashing? 

A. Not the second plane crashing. This is the 
building coming down. 

Q. Okay. 

A. To me, it's the second plane crashing. 
That's what it sounds like. 

Q. That is why I wanted to clarify that. 

A. Yeah. Again, like I said, I only know this 
because at the time I'm watching on the news and 
everything, afterwards. From where I was, you couldn't 
(inaudible) so we started running. 

I stopped. I picked up Fu . I grabbed him by 
the KED that we had on his waist and his hip, grabbed 



BRIAM SMITH 

his shirt, and I started to drag him and looked behind 
me, and then it was just like "bam," and it came so 
fast. It was like a bomb went off, you know, and it 
just hit me so suddenly, you know, and it picked me up, 
picked me right up off my feet and threw me a good 30 
feet through the air, because now you can imagine where 
the ambulance is. I'm on the other end of the bay 
side. Ain't nothing blocking the -- you know, between 
the street and me, and it just hit me and sent me 
flying and sent me closer to where the gear racks 
were. They moved them since, because I've been down 
there, but the gear racks were set up on the left-hand 
side behind where I set up all the chairs. 

It sent me past that part, and I got to the 
back of the gear racks and hit down face first, and 
then I felt the rush of everything coming behind me. I 
felt things coming by, hitting me, and it was just a 
sound, like whoosh, and I liken it to being hit by a 
wave on the beach, you know, because that's kind of 
what it felt like. I mean, the stuff was so heavy I 
thought I was being buried. 

I thought I was going to -- it felt like 
people were just dumping, you know, dirt like it was 
shooting at me, you know. It was so thick and heavy, 



29 
BRIAM SMITH 



and at that instant, I really felt like I was going to 
be buried, like that's how I was going to meet it, you 
know, and I took a breath, and then the blast came, and 
then there was -- you know, like I said, that wave of 
crap and everything else that hit us, and then I opened 
my eyes, and I couldn't see anything. It was just 
black. I mean, black as you can imagine. I mean, you 
can't close your eyes and get that black. 

And I stood up, and I thought to myself I 
have to -- I said I can't take another breath. You 
know, the next breath is it, you know, and it was just, 
like, kind of like a quick silence right after it 
happened, and I'm a volunteer firefighter out on the 
Island for seven years, and, you know, like, 
firefighters stuff started kicking in, and I thought to 
myself I got to get a Scott pack, you know, I got to 
get one, because I can't breathe. If I breathe, I'm 
going to die. I had one breath. I could hold it for 
you know, a good 30 seconds or so, and I got to find 
air . 

First thing I thought was, okay, I'm going to 
go out to my unit, because I work for a Haz-Tac unit. 
It has two packs on it. I run out to grab a pack, and 
I said, oh, I'm on an extra unit. So I'm in a 



30 
BRIAM SMITH 



firehouse. There's fire trucks here, and at that 
instant, I pulled my shirt up over my face, and I got 
ready to take my next breath, and I remember as I was 
doing it I thought to myself, you know, this is going 
to be the last one, you know. 

So I was breathing in, and my entire inside 
of my mouth, my nose, my throat, anything that was wet 
inside down the whole way down was instantly dirt, you 
know, like I was hacking and coughing, and it was 
horrible . 

So I tried to make my way towards where the 
back of the firehouse was. People at this point 
started screaming. People were trying to push past 
each other. You couldn't see anything, but you could 
feel people, like, grabbing on to you and trying to 
push you out of the way, and I found there was -- I 
think it was a Port Authority cop. He had a white 
shirt on. He had a white shirt on, and he looked like 
he was walking with a purpose, so I figured I think 
I'll follow this guy, because I was -- you know, kept 
saying, "Does anybody know where the exit is to this 
building?" Because I thought maybe all that crap was 
just in the firehouse. Little did I know that the back 
of the building is blown out, and the street is right 



31 



BRIAM SMITH 



behind it, and, you know, it's just as dark out there, 
but, I mean, when you can't see your hand in front of 
your face, you don't know what's going on, you know, 
and, you know, just survival stuff is kicking in, you 
know, and I remember I followed this guy into like a 
corner of the kitchen, and he turned around, and, I'm 
like, what are you doing? He said, "I don't know. I'm 
trying to find a way out." 

You know, I -- I remember thinking a lot of 
things, you know, and I thought to myself, my hopes got 
kind of dashed. I thought maybe I was, you know, 
heading, you know, to a final way out, and I pictured 
it was like -- I felt like I was on the Discovery 
Channel, you know and they show stuff, like, the 
concentration camps 



That was when I was picturing. The people 
are screaming, and there's complete chaos. You can't 
see anything. You can't breathe, and I didn't know how 



32 
BRIAM SMITH 



many more -- I mean, I know I couldn't keep breathing 
this crap, but eventually it starts to calm down a 
little bit. 

My partner was -- I heard my partner 
screaming my name, and I grabbed him, and he was just 

-- you know, he was beside himself. He was pretty 
upset. I said, "It's all right, Brian." I said, you 
know, "We are here, let's try to figure out what's 
going on. Let's try to relax a little bit," and 
actually he said -- we got separated again, because he 
went out towards the engine bay again, and I'm in the 
kitchen, and I tried walking back out to the engine 
base, and I heard on my radio, because I think we 
already switched to Brooklyn North again, because 
initially we were on citywide. You couldn't get on the 
Citywide frequency to your save your life, so congested 
going over the bridge. It was nuts. 

So I remember hearing him screaming on the 
radio, you know, 31 Mary, 31 Mary, just, you know, 
yelling a Mayday, saying that we were trapped in a 
building, you know, that it was -- you know, there was 
rubble. We couldn't breathe. We were injured. We 
took heavy casualties. You know, that basically we 
were taking a pretty solid beating, and then when I saw 



33 
BRIAM SMITH 



him again, I was getting ready to radio. He said, "I 
already called them. " I said, "Yeah, I know. " I said, 

"You can't give these guys a message like that." I 
said, you know, "We will have to figure out what we can 
figure out here, but, you know, you're screaming like 
that, somebody else is going to come running in here 
trying to get us out, and they are going to get killed 
out there, too. Let's just let everybody try to figure 
out where they're at right now. Let's take it, you 
know -- try to think this through." 

So I pretty much relayed the same message, 
but in a -- you know, in a much calmer fashion, you 
know, for the sake of everybody else that was out 
there, and there were people that were screaming. Like 
I said, the dust was starting to settle a bit. You 
could see. I mean, not all that well, but there were a 
lot of people that got hurt, that got broken legs, and 
a firefighter that just -- he got a tibia fracture. 

A lot of people (inaudible.) So I grabbed my 
partner, and I walked to -- you know, we were in, like, 
the engine bay area, and I said to him, "Brian, listen, 
before we do anything else, we got to kind of figure 
out whatever -- I need to know where you are at, we are 
on the same page here, you know. " 



34 
BRIAM SMITH 



I said to him -- I said, "Basically this 
point we have two options. Option No. 1 is there will 
be -- salvage whatever we can out of the ambulance, 
because at this point it was in bad shape, but I mean, 
there was still some stuff that could have been taken 
out, so we can salvage it, pick our way through the 
rubble, try and find our way out of here and just run 
to Brooklyn and don't stop until we hit the water, 
maybe swim back to the battalion. Whatever it takes, 
we got to get the hell out of here. 

I remember it was pretty funny, because I 
remember he looked at me, and he said to me -- he says, 

"There is only one option. We are getting the hell 
out of here. I'm not dying with these people here." 
He's, like, we are going to get killed. I said, "Well, 
let's -- let me just go through Option No. 2 before I 
make a decision." 

Option No. 2 is that we stay, that we treat 
every patient that we have, because there is no EMS. 
There is nobody here. I said, "You know, if there is 
anybody that was out in the street, those guys got 
wiped out." I said, "There is nobody else here to help 
them." I said, "I can't, you know, in good conscience 
leave these people." I said, "I'm staying, and, you 



35 
BRIAM SMITH 



know --" I said, "I can't leave anybody behind," and he 
said, "All right, I'm with you," and he's like, I'm not 
leaving your side. 

I said, "All right. Now that we have a plan, 
let's go implement it." We went inside, and we 
splinted the guy's leg. We got him -- he was on an 
long board. Like I said, things started to settle a 
little bit. There were firefighters inside and outside 
the firehouse. 

I went into the kitchen area where there were 
civilians, everybody kind of congregating and did like 
a -- you know, everyone had three seconds to do their 
thing. I said, "I don't want to hear your history. I 
don't want to hear what kind of medicine you are 
taking. What hurts? You know. My arm is cut. What 
hurts?" You know, and I went through the whole thing, 
20 people, 30 people, whatever it was. 

So at that point, we started to assign people 
to pick people up that couldn't walk, pass them out the 
window, assign people that, you know -- that couldn't 
walk, but, you know, without help, but could basically 
kind of carry some of their own weight. Okay, listen, 
you two guys help him, and let's go out the back door, 
start walking down the street. Walking wounded were 



36 
BRIAM SMITH 



getting -- I mean, everybody was making their way out. 

Fu was still in there. He was out by the 
back exit. I remember because I went upstairs to check 
to see if there was anybody up there. I went past him, 
and he was pretty worried that we were going to leave 
him, but I assured him that we weren't going to. 

So we went to -- we went upstairs. There 
were a couple of more people up there, got them out of 
the building, and we basically -- we emptied out pretty 
much the whole building. I mean, there were still some 
scattered guys there, firefighters and stuff, and one 
of them, Gordon says, he is one of the captains. I 
didn't make the recognition. He was wearing turnout 
gear, so I didn't really got to see who it was, but 
this guy Gordon and myself walked back out to the 
engine bay area, because, like I said, there was a lot 
of debris out there. 

I didn't know if people were buried. I said 
okay, before we leave the house, let's get a shot out 
here. Is there anybody out here? We're screaming, and 
just waiting and listening, you know, to hear if 
anybody responds, and nobody responded, so I said, "All 
right. There's nobody to dig out here." I said, 
"Let's get the hell out of here," you know and that's 



37 
BRIAM SMITH 



when the -- we started to hear the sound of the next 
tower coming down, and again, it sounded like a plane. 

When we were in that house, and we started 
hearing it coming down, I thought that this plane -- 
I'm thinking the third plane is hitting, you know. 
Little do I know that the first plane already hit, and 
the second plane hit, and the tower came down, and I 
think the towers are still up, and I remember 
consciously thinking there is no way that this tower 
came down, because when I was out there before, and I 
looked up, I mean, I thought to myself, all right, the 
collapse zone on the structure fire is one and a half 
times the height of the building, which puts me 
somewhere back to Brooklyn. I said, "That thing comes 
down, we are all dead. You know, nobody could live 
through that. You know, it's crazy." 

So like I said, after that, you know, what I 
think is the second plane, but was really actually the 
tower coming down. I mean, there is no way in the 
world for me that I'm thinking that this thing went 
down because of the damage I figure it would cause, so 
I think it's a plane, and again, when the Tower 1 comes 
down it sounds just like a plane, and it was so loud. 
You know, the energy of all the steel and the concrete 



BRIAM SMITH 

and everything else giving way, and I guess the rush of 
air . 

We started running, and we ran into the 
bathroom just behind the apparatus bay, so we started 
heading to the back of the house on the left-hand side, 
and the three of us ran in there, and we got in the 
corner on the floor, and the three of us were praying. 
I had the firefighter on my left and my partner behind 
me, and we were just kind of like huddled on the ground 
real low, and then it hit, and, you know, we kind of 
got, like, pushed into the wall, and the same thing 
with the smoke and the dust and everything else. 

You couldn't see. You couldn't breathe, and 
it lasted awhile, you know, and eventually it starts 
again. It starts -- the blast part of it is over, and, 
you know, like things are starting to settle down a 
little bit. You can hear there's a lot of noise 
outside, stuff falling, stuff falling apart, whatever 
it was, and I remember I was laying there on the floor, 
and I heard water running. I thought it was weird. I 
thought, you know, we were in the bathroom. I thought 
someone was taking a leak, you know, and I said, "What 
the hell is that?" I said -- you know, and the two -- 
the other two guys, I mean, they were -- they were 



39 
BRIAM SMITH 



shaking. They were really upset, and they were crying, 
and I said, "Hey, is someone taking a leak in here or 
what?" And these guys, they were laughing. What are 
you talking about? 

I said, "Listen, I hear water running, " and I 
got up, and there was a sink above my head, and it was 
weird, like I think about it now, but I leaned forward, 
and I turned the faucet off and the water stopped, and 
I said -- I remember, I talked to the guy (inaudible) 
hey, guys, listen, you know for whatever reason, we 
were spared here. We still got work to do. Let's go. 

And we got up, and we just got back into the 
mode again and just started getting up and running to 
do our next thing, you know. 

So we went to -- we got up. We started -- 
again, we made another sweep of the firehouse. Nobody 
was left in there. Went to the back of the building. 
Fu was on the ground, and there was a couple of 
firefighters outside, and then they are, like, looking 
at us, you know, you're EMS, and they were, like, can 
we pick him up. We need a back board, you know. I 
said "You guys are worried about immobilization? 
You're crazy. Let's just pick this guy up and get him 
the hell out of here." I said, "What are you worried 



40 
BRIAM SMITH 



about? You going to make him a paraplegic? He's going 
to be buried in here. You guys got to be kidding me." 

So we picked him up, and we tried doing like 
a soldier carry with our arms on each shoulder, and it 
just wasn't working out, because he wouldn't let go of 
his briefcase, and he was whacking us in the face with 
it, and no matter how much we tried to make him let go 
of it, he wouldn't let go, you know, and we come to 
find out the guy has like half a million dollars in 
cash in his briefcase, you know, and really it was a 
lot — 

Q. It was one million cash. 

A. It was like the mafia movies. You flip the 
briefcase up and you see all the hundreds stacked in 
there. I was, like, holy cow, you know, he wasn't -- 
he would not let go. Because we offered. We said, 

"Look, we'll carry it if you want us to." He would 
not let go, so eventually we were, like, what the hell 
are we going to do with this guy? 

So we just picked him up and carried him on 
our shoulders, like legs over here, arms over here and 
basically just took turns trying to carry him. 

Now, we come out, I guess from this map 
because the bag of the firehouse is blown out. I guess 



41 
BRIAM SMITH 



this is Cedar here, so we come out onto Cedar, and we 
tried going back and forth, and everybody out there is 
telling us that all these intersections are blocked off 
with debris, you can't get through, but eventually we 
make it out to -- I can't figure. 

Q. Thames. 

A. To Thames, I guess, because we start heading 
in the direction of Rector. 

Q. Thames. 

A. So eventually we get down that way. I don't 
know if we make our way back to Greenwich or to 
Trinity, get down in that direction. To be honest with 
you, I got very turned around, 1983 -- wherever 10 
Rector is -- you know. 

Q. You know, that is not really important. You 
made your way down. 

A. In that general vicinity. We get down there, 
and we carried Fu down that way, and we get into this 
building, and I remember the reason why we stopped in 
there was because there was clean air. I mean, there 
was so much garbage and debris on the street, you can't 
see a damn thing, and our eyes were burning, and I 
said, "You know, we're going to get killed out here 
walking through that crap," and it wasn't like you 



42 
BRIAM SMITH 



looked up and said, oh, you know, the towers are gone. 
You couldn't see two feet in front of you, you know, 
above, below, whatever it was. You couldn't see your 
hands in front of your face. 

So, we stopped at this building because a guy 
at the door, he opened the door, and I remember looking 
inside, and there was clean air in there, and I said, 

"We got to get in there, " and I said to the guy, "How 
many stories in this building?" He said "27 stories." 

I didn't know whatever became of Fu, but he's 
like the comic relief in this story, but anyway -- so 
we make our way down to Rector Street. We get in there 
and, again, like I said, I mean, it was kind of like a 
toss-up. Do I go in this big building or stay out on 
the street? And I was like, I get to get some air. I 
can't even see anymore. My eyes felt like Mace, you 
know. 

So we went inside, and there was a security 
desk right in the middle of the lobby. It was a big 
lobby, you know, and we went in there. We put Fu down, 
and there were people in there, you know, like maybe 
20, 30 people, and, you know, I said to the guys at the 
security desk -- I said, "You know, are there still 
people in this building?" The guy's like, there's 



43 
BRIAM SMITH 



hundreds of people in this building. We told them to 
stay at their desks, and I said, "Jesus Christ. We got 
to get these people out of here, you know. They -- 
these people are going to get killed. You know, I 
said, "We got to get the hell out of Manhattan." I 
said, "We got to try to get as many people out as we 
can," so I radioed out to dispatch. 

I told them the address we were at, and I 
said, "Central, this is 31 mary. You know, my partner 
and I made it into this location. I need directions to 
send these people out to give them -- you know just 
tell them which way to go, you know, and I need 
directions as precise as -- I'm in this building. I'm 
walking out the front door. Do I make a right or a 
left?" 

I said, "Central, I can't see street names. 
I can't see signs. I can't see anything." I said I 
need rights and lefts, you know, and they said, "10-4 
one Mary. We'll call you back with directions." I said 
"Okay. " So — 

Q. Did they ever do that? 

A. Yeah, they did. 

Q. Okay. 

A. And yeah, it was a Brooklyn North 



44 
BRIAM SMITH 



dispatcher. The craziness of everything, I don't know, 
you know, who it was, but people were coming up to me 
and saying, you know, are you all right? Are you 
hurt? I'm, like, yeah, I'm fine. Don't worry. Like, 
no, you're bleeding real bad, and I had on a paper 
mask, and I pulled it away it was full of blood, you 
know, and I thought that I broke my nose, because there 
was blood coming from my nose, blood coming from my 
face. I was cut up, and I said, "I can't feel it, you 
know, so whatever it is isn't enough to worry about. 
You know, we'll deal with it later on. At this point I 
mean, this whole time is just --" is all adrenaline, so 
we were in the building, and we started making 
announcements over the PA system. 

My partner goes into the stairwell. He goes 
upstairs, and my partner went upstairs, starting 
clearing out some of the floors. I was downstairs 
trying to get a handle on things, and eventually the 
central dispatch called me, Brooklyn dispatch calls me 
with the directions, and I was with that volunteer 
firefighter from Commack, this guy Rob. 

Like I said, he worked in the trade center 
and he was familiar with the area. I said to him -- I 
said, "Rob, do you understand what this is? What she's 



45 
BRIAM SMITH 



telling me? Because I don't know what the hell she is 
telling me." You know, I mean I know make a right, but 
she was giving me street names, you know, and I said, 
"Rob I don't know what the hell she's talking about." 

He said, "I know exactly where she is sending 
us. I know exactly where I am, you know, no sweat. 
You know, I can handle it." I'm, like, all right, 
great . 

So I cleared all this crap off the desk. 
There was maybe like a hundred people in the lobby at 
this point, and I got up -- like I was, you know, like 
a public speaker in ancient Greece or something, and I 
said, "All right, folks. Everyone has to pay 
attention. You have to pay attention to what I'm 
saying explicitly. Nobody -- if anybody doesn't want 
to listen or want do their own thing, be my guest." 

I said, "You know, your blood is in your own 
hands at that point." I said, "If you want to go home 
and see your families, I have directions. I will get 
you to your family." 

Meanwhile a lot of it was, you know, was BS, 
because I don't know what happened to some of these 
people. I don't know if they know exactly what's going 
on. I'm sending these people to their deaths or 



46 
BRIAM SMITH 



anything, but they don't know -- you know, these people 
were just looking for a voice to tell them which way to 
run, you know. 

So basically I said to -- you know, I got -- 
listen, we're going to be walking out of here. We're 
going to be walking out of here single file. Stay 
arm's length away from the person in front of you, 
because if you do anything more than that, you are 
going to lose sight of them and get lost out there. 

There is not going to be any running. There 
is not going to be any cutting, no pushing, no 
shoving,. Basically if we start doing this, people are 
going to get hurt. If you are walking out of here and 
you think you know a better way than what my dispatcher 
is telling me, and you want to make a left when 
everyone else is making a right, you are going to get 
hit by a plane, a building is going to fall on you, 
some debris is going to fall on you, trip on some crap 
out there. You are going to get hurt. I said, "I 
promise you, no one is coming to get you for a long 
time, because I just came from that direction, and 
there ain't nobody left over there, so you have to 
listen to what I say to the letter" and I could hear a 
pin drop. You know, a hundred people in the lobby, but 



47 
BRIAM SMITH 



the echoes when people talk, and nobody said a word, 
you know, and I was going through the whole thing, keep 
a mask on your face, breathe in through your nose, out 
through your mouth, try to squint, everything to try 
to, you know, instill in these people that I kind of 
knew what I was talking about. 

People were, like, who do we follow? I don't 
know (inaudible) because initially I pointed to the guy 
Rob. I said, "You follow one person and one person 
alone, and that's the person in front of you. You 
don't stop following until you get to the water." 

I spoke with this guy Rob afterwards, and he 
said to me -- he said, "You know, Brian, when we got 
down to the water," he said, "Its' funny, because as I 
was walking, I felt like the Pied Piper, you know, 
because we'd pick up some stragglers along the way, and 
I'd be, like, get in line with everybody else. 

Just, you know get in line with everybody 
else, and he said that once he started getting to a 
spot in Manhattan where it started to clear out a 
little bit, he said, you know, behind him was -- like, 
I mean you could run a laser beam down it, a straight 
line. These people followed it right to the letter, 
you know, and they all got out of the building, and my 



48 
BRIAM SMITH 



partner, you know, he was like -- are we going with 
them? And I'm, like, you know, we can't leave yet, 
there is still more people in the building, and we 
still had Fu. 

I mean, I don't know what the hell to do with 
this guy. I said, "I can't carry this guy back to 
Brooklyn, you know. " 

So we did the same thing again. This time I 
went up on the floors. We cleared out the rest of the 
people in the building. Some of the people were 
hesitant. They were, like, we were told to stay at the 
desk. I said, "Listen, if you want to stay by your 
desk and get killed in here, it's your business." 

I said, "You want to go home to your family" 
I said, "I got -- you know, I can give you the way." 
And nobody stayed behind their desk, you know. 
Everybody left. 

So we went to -- down the lobby. Same thing 
again. Filled up the lobby, a hundred people, 150 
people. It was a bigger crowd than the first time 
around. Gave the same speech again, and we didn't have 
any paper masks to give anybody. I know Gordon started 

-- he had the button-down uniform. Started taking it 
off and cutting it into strips so people could put it 



49 
BRIAM SMITH 



over their face, and like I said, again, the same 
speech . 

There was an off-duty police officer there, 
and he approached me and said -- I gave him the same 
directions. He knew exactly where I was talking about, 
and so -- 

Q. So you were going and making your way down to 
the ferry, right? 

A. No, I never left the building. 
Q. You were sending the people in the direction 
of the ferry? 

A. I guess. Like I said, I don't know where the 
hell central sent them, but the people who were 
familiar with the area, who were the leaders of this 
group, they knew where they were going. 

All I knew was they made it right out of the 
building. After that I couldn't see them any more, you 
know. 

I have to stop for a drink of water. My 
throat is getting a little dry. 

So anyway, we evacuated the building again. 
At this point, there's nobody left in the building. Fu 
was still in there, myself and Gordon. There was 
another guy, older guy, and his foot was mangled. He 



50 
BRIAM SMITH 



couldn't walk on it, and he said to me his name was 
Cribby or Crippy, or something like that. I mean, I 
don't know if he was making a joke because he was, 
like, being crippled or whatever it was, but I know 
that when this group of people had left, my partner 
was, like, you know, are we leaving with this group? 
And I'm like, listen, we could try to manage to carry 
Fu the hell out of here, but this other guy's got to 
weight 250 pounds. I'm not made with that kind of 
strength. I said, "I can't carry that guy." We have 
to wait until eventually vehicles start coming in, 
because this whole area -- and like I said, I don't 
know where the hell I am in -- you know, in relation to 
the trade center, and all I know is I can't see a damn 
thing . 

I mean, it's not black outside, but it's dark 
as hell. You can't see anything, and I said eventually 
a vehicle is going to start coming down this way, and 
when one does we will try to flag him down and, you 
know, throw a patient in there. 

So we waited there for awhile, and I know 
that the whole time that we were in that building I was 
scared, because I thought that -- you could hear planes 
and stuff around flying outside. I mean, eventually, 



51 
BRIAM SMITH 



like I said, once I get out to -- once I get into the 
hospital I realized that they're the fighter jets, but, 
you know, I don't know what the hell is flying around. 
Like I said, I can't see anything. 

To me, every time one of the buildings fell 
down, it was a plane coming in, and then I saw -- I'm 
thinking to myself, you know, how many -- LaGuardia and 
Kennedy. I mean, there's got to be dozens of planes 
out there. I'm waiting for the next one to come in any 
second now, you know, and I know that my impulse was 
just to run like hell, and I wanted to get out of 
Manhattan in the worst way, and we were listening to -- 
they had a clock radio in the -- by the security deck, 
and we were trying to listen to it. It was very 
staticky, but we could hear reports of there were -- 
planes were hitting Manhattan, that they were going -- 
that they hit Pittsburgh, that they were trying to do 
something to Chicago, that they attempted something at 
Camp David, that they hit the Pentagon, and I'm 
thinking Jesus Christ, how many -- there's going to be 
a million planes up there. We are under a full-scale 
attack, you know, and, like I said, I wanted to get, I 
mean, I want to go back out to Long Island, way out 
east where I live. 



52 
BRIAM SMITH 



I don't want to be anywhere near the city. I 
want to get the hell out of here, you know, but we 
stayed there, you know, because, like I said, you know 
right from the 10-10 house. I mean, I could have 
walked away, but, you know, I don't think I could have, 
you know, lived with myself if I walked away from 
people that, you know, are going to be stuck in there. 

It's nice to be able to walk away. These 
people didn't have that luxury, so we waited in there 
for awhile, and eventually I could start to hear 
emergency vehicles outside, and I went to -- I went 
outside to see if could flag down. Eventually I 
flagged down an RMP and, you know, just a regular -- 
regular precinct, you know, regular police unit, and I 
said to him -- I said, "Listen, I got two patients 
inside that can't walk, and need to go to a hospital, 
you know. They're hurt pretty bad, and, you know, they 
-- would you guys be able to take them out of here? 

And they were like, yeah, all right, so we 
went inside. We carried the two of them out to the 
car, threw them in the back seat of the car, and I 
remember they were -- Fu was like, you know, I never 
forget you, I never forget you. I said, "I know, Fu . 
Get in the car. Get to the hospital." And whatever 



53 
BRIAM SMITH 



hospital they went to, I mean, I don't know. I told 
them go to any kind of hospital. 

So they sent those guys on their way, and at 
that point, I said to my partner -- I said, "Listen, 
there's nobody left. You know, there is nobody left to 
treat, or to carry or to save or anything else." I 
said, "Let's start going home, and let's do what we can 
to get back to Brooklyn." 

At that point, we started walking down. Like 
I said, when we started taping again, down towards Wall 
Street. I remember because as we were walking down, 
Gordon and myself, we reached the bull. That's where 
we meet up again with Murray. 

We were with him in the 10-10 house, but we 
got separated when we left, and we eventually -- like I 
said, we meet up with him again, and as we start 
heading down towards Wall Street, and we walked down 
there, and his vehicle was parked somewhere around 
there. I mean, I don't know where the hell it was 
parked, but I know it was definitely in the line of 
fire, because his vehicle took a beating. 

He was, like, listen, my car is not too far 
from here. I'm going to run down and get it. You 
know, because my partner -- he had a sprained ankle. 



54 
BRIAM SMITH 



He couldn't walk all that well, and, like I said, I'm 
starting to feeling the pain now. I could feel the 
back of my neck was all swollen. My head was 
splitting, you know, a real back headache. I was 
bleeding, you know, I was sore, and the adrenaline and 
everything else was starting to wear off. 

I mean, I don't know what time of the morning 
it is at this point, but, I mean, I hadn't had anything 
to eat since dinner, three o'clock in the morning, the 
tour before, you know. 

So we went to -- so this guy is, like, I'm 
going to be gone. Hang out here, I'll be back to you 
guys and see if I can get as far as the vehicle and see 
what we could do to drive out of here. He left, and my 
partner and I were waiting down in the street for a 
while . 

Eventually Murray came back. He got us into 
his car. I had to sit on my helmet, because of all the 
glass from the windows were blown in, and the car was 
full of debris. There was so much dust on the street 
you couldn't see anything. In fact, I gave him my 
sunglasses so he could see while he was driving, but 
the windshield was gone, and he -- we started driving, 
and I don't know where the hell he was driving us, and 



55 
BRIAM SMITH 



I said to him -- I said, "Listen, all we want to do is 
get back the Brooklyn, because all I want to do is get 
in my vehicle back at Battalion 31 and just drive --" I 
knew we had to go to the hospital. I told him let me 
drive out to Long Island. You know, a Long Island 
Hospital, because I'm imagining like these war stories, 
you know, like, being on the stretcher in the hallway 
in some hospital with the lights flickering on and off, 
and I'm looking like this, and, again, like I said, 
we're expecting the next wave of assaults coming in. 
I'm, like, the last thing I want to do is be in -- I 
don't want to be anywhere near the city. I want to get 
the hell out of here, and so we started driving down -- 
started driving down Wall Street, and we made a stop at 
100 Wall Street. I remember the address because we saw 
a conditions truck, and I remember stopping, and I 
said, you know, let's -- you know, maybe it's a 
Brooklyn boss. You know, if it is, we'll hook up with 
this guy, because he's, like, let's go back to 
Battalion 4, and, you know, we'll go to the hospital. 
You guys get checked out. 

I said, "Listen, I don't want to go anywhere 
in Brooklyn. I mean, in Manhattan." I said, "I want 
to get back to Brooklyn." Whatever it takes. I don't 



56 



BRIAM SMITH 



know care if I got to walk over the bridge and carry 
Gordon the whole way. I said, "I got to get the hell 
out of here . " 

So we went to see where this guy was a boss 
out of, and we got out, the three of us. We walked 
into the building 100 Wall Street, and, like I said, it 
was dusty as hell. There were emergency vehicles going 
this way and that, and the lieutenant comes out. Hey, 
how you doing, lieutenant, you know, we're a Brooklyn 
unit. We are trying to see what we can do to try to 
get back to Brooklyn, and ended up this guy was -- he 



The guy was an idiot. I mean, I don't know 
what his name is, but this guy was -- I'd really like 
to meet him, because I'd really like to know where the 
hell his head was, because, I mean, if you could 
imagine, I mean, my partner and I, we got our asses 
kicked in a really serious way, you know, and I'm 
bleeding, and we're covered with dust, and my partner 
can't even walk, and he sees the two of us come 
strolling up on the building, the three of us, and he 
says, "Oh, good. I'm glad you guys are here. I have a 
patient inside, and I need you guys to hang out with 
her, you know. I got a few other calls I got to run 



57 
BRIAM SMITH 



to. " 

What's wrong with the patient, you know? He 
says, "Well, she's -- she fainted and she's feeling a 
little weak, a little dizzy, a little nauseous, and, 
you know, just the excitement of everything has got her 
a little frightened, and she's a little lightheaded." 

I said, "What, are you kidding me?" You 
know, and the guy is, like, don't worry about it. I 
called an ambulance. They should be here in a couple 
of minutes. Just hang out with her for a little while, 
and I said, "All right." 

You know, this guy gets in his truck and 
leaves us there, you know, and I remember there was -- 
you know, we must have looked like the two biggest 
jerks in the whole city, because here we are -- I mean, 
beat to hell, and I'm literally laying in the floor of 
this lobby. This woman is on a chair with -- he didn't 
even leave his oxygen. 

I said, "Can you leave your oxygen?" No, I 
need that for my calls. Here, here is some information 
about her vital signs and stuff. I said, "We don't 
have any equipment. We got nothing. Technically we 
are off line. They have us off line, because we are 
injured. " 



BRIAM SMITH 

And he said, "Don't worry about it. Just 
kind of hang out with her and keep an eye on things.". 

Murray was pissed off, who the hell is this 
guy, because the two jerk lieutenants -- I mean the two 
jerk EMTs are sitting on the ground like this. We 
couldn't even stand any more, and we were like, do you 
have any allergies to medicine, going through, like, 
I'm going to treat this woman. Like, we couldn't do 
anything if anything ever happened anyway. 

Stupidest thing. I mean, again, like, we 
were living through it, you know, I mean, it didn't 
seem -- I mean, it bothered me. I said, like, "All 
right, you know, whatever." 

Now, this guy is a jerk, but we were there 
for over an hour waiting for an ambulance, and I 
remember thinking to myself, what the hell is this guy 
kidding me? If an ambulance actually did get 
dispatched, could you imagine an ambulance getting a 
call for a syncopal episode and dizziness at 100 Wall 
Street. Who the hell knows what's going on down by the 
trade center, what other kind of crap is coming in. 

This is a joke, and what are you guys kidding 
me? And eventually this knucklehead comes back, and I 
mean, I don't know what, you know, whether any of this 



59 
BRIAM SMITH 



gets archived or anything else -- 

Q. Don't worry about it. 

A. You know, the guy was an idiot, you know. I 
don't -- I'm not out to get anybody in trouble. Maybe 
the guy just couldn't think straight either, because it 
was hectic, so give him the benefit of the doubt, but 
he came back, and he said, "You guys are still here? 
The ambulance didn't come yet?" What are you an idiot? 
Murray was saying the whole -- he was mad as hell 
trying to -- he was, like, get up, see if you can find 
when this guy is coming back. When is the ambulance 
coming, and we kept calling, and we didn't get shit, 
and we -- you guys -- like I'm going to flag down 
somebody. I'm going to get you guys out of here, and 
he eventually gets a police van, whatever it was. It 
was a van of some sort, and the guy -- I mean he said 
to me -- he was, like, all right, listen, we are going 
to take her to Beekman. I want the two of you guys to 
go with her. You got to escort her to Beekman. 

I said, "What, are you kidding? What the hell 
is Beekman?" He said, "It's a hospital in Manhattan." 
I said, "Listen pal," I said, "wrong borough." I said, 
"I'm going to Brooklyn." I said, "I stopped here to 
see if we could help you out." 



60 
BRIAM SMITH 



He said, "Well, like, as long as you guys 
make sure you get to an emergency room. You guys are 
hurt really bad." I said, "Yeah, no kidding." So we 

-- and I remember that Murray was kind of -- he was 
trying to convince us, too, to go to a hospital, go to 
Battalion 4, and maybe we could hook up with a ride 
from there, but, like I said, I was -- like I told him, 
I said, "Listen, we will meet up with you again." 

I remember when he first told me he was a 
lieutenant from BITS, too, because he was a lieutenant, 
but he was wearing, you know, stuff like you guys. I 
don't know what the hell he was a lieutenant of. So 
for a minute, I was, oh, EMS. I said, "Oh, what 
battalion?" He goes, "I'm with BITS," and I remember I 
started laughing. 

I said 31 Henry, Tour 1. 31 Henry, Tour 1. 
I said, "Don't forget it. If you catch us sleeping 



61 
BRIAM SMITH 



remember us," but I said, "You know, we are going to 
hedge our bets, and we are going to try to walk down to 
the ferry, and we're going to see if, you know, we can 
hitch a ride over back over to Brooklyn, and we get 
down to the ferry, and we have -- there was a surgeon 
that was over there that looked us over. 

We spent a little bit of time at the dock 
trying to figure out, you know, what ferry was leaving 
for Brooklyn, and eventually they got us on a ferry, 
but then they took us back off because they had -- they 
got us a ride with harbor patrol. 

All this time is, you know, hours are going 
by, you know, and we -- eventually the NYPD harbor 
patrol takes my partner and myself over to the Brooklyn 
Navy Yard, because they said, you know, "Where do you 
want to go in Brooklyn?" I said, "Anywhere, wherever 
it is. I'll walk the rest of the way, get a cab, 
whatever, who cares. Just get me back out there." 

They took us in the Navy Yard, which is 
pretty close to here, so I was pretty happy, you know. 
I said, "This is great. If I have to, I know I can 
walk to the station." 

So we -- there was a security guard. I mean, 
there was a -- you know a small entourage of 



62 
BRIAM SMITH 



firefighters on that side that met us. They walked us 
over to a van, and a security guard was there, and the 
security guard gave us a lift back to the station, and 
we got into the station, and I remember he pulled up, 
and, man, I was really hurting at this point. I was 
sore as hell, because I remember every bump that he hit 
going down Park and coming down, and I was, like, I'm 
going to murder this guy because he hit some big 
potholes, and we get into the station and Gordon and I, 
I mean, dragging ourselves with whatever we had left. 

I don't know what time it was. I'd have to 
look at my ACR's that people wrote on me, but I 
remember we came inside, and people were like -- they 
gave us, like, a double take, because they, you know, 
they all thought we were dead, because when we were 
radioing out, the guys were in the lieutenant's office 
listening to the radio, because we were on Brooklyn 
North, and all they are hearing is us, you know, going 
through these transmissions. We are buried in here. 
We can't breathe, you know. The building came down 
us. We are trapped in the rubble, and these guys are 
all in here crying, thinking they are listening to us 
die . 

Meanwhile, you know, four hours later or five 



63 
BRIAM SMITH 



hours, six hours, whatever the hell it is, we come 
stumbling into the engine bay that -- the garage there, 
and, again, I mean, we must have looked pretty awful. 

I mean I know I felt pretty awful by that 
point, but we got into the station, and like I said 
people did a double take. They were, like, oh, shit, 
you guys are alive, and they came in and like 
immediately like -- it was just like ants jumping on 
us, and, you know, sat us down, and got us some Gator 
Aid, took my boots off, and then started going through 
the, you know -- blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. 

You know, we have to take you to a hospital. 
I'm, like, I don't want to go to the hospital. Who 
cares what you want, that kind of thing. So it was 
kind of weird, you know, being on the opposite end. 
People -- what is your date of birth? What is your 
Social Security number? I'm, like, those are my 
questions. Don't be asking me that crap. 

So we went through the -- we went through the 
whole rigamarole. We were boarded and collared and did 
the whole nine yards and they took us over to KCH, and 
we went in there, but that was like the -- as badly as 
I was beaten up at the trade center, these guys, they 
were -- they murdered me. 



64 



BRIAM SMITH 



BRIAM SMITH 



66 



BRIAM SMITH 



67 



BRIAM SMITH 



He wasn't working. They called him in. He's 
working right now, but he's okay. It's just your 
father. No one has heard anything from him. 

So I called over to HazMat, and I was able to 
get through, and I said, "Listen, blah, blah, blah, 
take a message, and I'm trying to find out. What's the 
story?" Well, who's calling? I explained to him who I 



BRIAM SMITH 

was, where I was, and I remember the guy was crying. 

He said like, we lost them all, and after I 
got discharged from the County, I came back here, got 
changed, did some paperwork with the lieutenants, 
because I had the uniform here. I got changed, and one 
of the lieutenants here, one of my lieutenants -- one 
of the tour one lieutenants gave me a ride over to 
Haz-Mat 288 in Maspeth in Queens, and I went in there, 
because I figured maybe these guys would have, you 
know, some more news and what have you, and I went in 
there, and the captain pulled me in the office and 
basically went through the thing. 

He's, like, listen, you know -- because I 
told him. I said, "You know, don't beat around the 
bush with me. You know, I'm MOS . " I said, "You know, 
other than the fact that I'm his family, so be 
straightforward with me." 

He said, "Well, the last radio transmission 
we had from your father, he was on the 11th Floor of 
Tower 2, and then it came down, so we haven't heard a 
word from him since, and to this point, no one has 
heard anything from him since, so he's, you know -- 
they haven't made any kind of recovery or anything like 
else like that, but, you know, from there I get picked 



69 
BRIAM SMITH 



up. 

One of my fire chiefs from my fire department 
on Long Island, a friend of mine came out to -- because 
they were only letting emergency vehicles in the city 
at that point. They shut down the expressway. So he 
came in. He picked me up. Went home, and the rest is, 
as they say, is history, but that's pretty much, you 
know, soup to nuts, I guess. 

Is there anything I missed on the question 
sheet? 

MR. DUN: This concludes the interview with 
BRIAM SMITH. The time is 934 hours. 



File No. 9110144 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

EMT MARY MERCED 

Interview Date: October 23, 2001 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



M. MERCED 2 

MS. BASTEDENBECK: Today is October 
23rd, 2001. The time now is 2312 hours. My 
name is Christine Bastedenbeck . I'm with 
the New York City Fire Department. Tonight 
I'm conducting an interview with the 
following individual. 

Please state your name, your rank and 
your assignment. 

EMT MERCED: EMT Mary Merced, Division 
3. 

MS. BASTEDENBECK: What's your rank, 
Mary? 

EMT MERCED: EMT. 
Q. Can you please give me your account of 
the morning of September 11th, 2001. 

A. On September 11th -- well, let me go 
back. I work with Deputy Chief Goldfarb, and we 
were working 6 Charlie the night before. We had 
a meeting at 7:00 in the morning which exceeded 
our end of tour time. 

Once we left the meeting, I was 
monitoring SOD and I heard a police officer yell 
there was an explosion in the World Trade Center. 
It came in broken up, but I made it out. I told 



M. MERCED 3 

the Chief, "Did you hear that?" He said he heard 
what I heard, but I had to repeat it. The police 
officer gets back on again and says about an 
airplane but didn't complete the word. I said, 
"Oh, shoot." I said, "An airplane crashed into 
the World Trade Center." 

I quickly lit up the vehicle, and I'm 
heading towards Manhattan. 

Q. Where were you coming from? 
A. We were coming from -- we had a meeting 
here . 

Q. At the division office? 

A. At the division office, the Division 3 
office, right. 

I'm heading towards the Battery Tunnel, 
and all the while it's being confirmed, we're 
hearing it over EMS citywide and the PD radio and 
fire radio. When I was heading towards the 
Battery Tunnel, you could see the smoke on one of 
the towers. It was unbelievable. Initially I 
thought it was an accident. 

So we proceeded, made our way in heavy 
traffic into the Battery Tunnel. The second 
plane must have hit while we were in the tunnel, 



M. MERCED 4 

because as soon as I came out, both buildings 
were on fire. I just looked up in awe. I never 
thought that I would ever see this. 

It's ironic to talk about premonitions 
or stuff like that because two weeks prior to 
this -- I'm always talking about it. I always 
say that we're not prepared, that hazmat doesn't 
have enough training. I've got other training 
outside of here. I'm a WMB technician, I got the 
national certification from Jersey City Medical 
Center and stuff like that. 

I'm always saying I learned more and I 
know that when I was taught in hazmat, they 
thought me this much is not enough. Chief 
Goldfarb, the funny thing when we started our 6 
Charlie tour that Saturday night prior to this 
happening, he said, "Mary, you know what? I'm 
going to check all the MERVs and the LSU trucks 
because if something happens then I'll be sure 
we're prepared." It's funny, Saturday night, 
Sunday night and Monday night we did it. You 
wouldn't have thought that he would be right. 

Anyway, we got to the scene. A bunch 
of fire trucks and police, fire equipment, 



M. MERCED 5 

everybody you can think of who was there were 
getting there or trying to get there. We got out 
of the vehicle. We grabbed the command board, 
something we seldom use. We used it one other 
time on a job. 

I parked on the West Side Highway 
between Albany and Liberty Street, number one X 
marked on the map. We proceed up the West Side 
Highway towards the south tower. I see Chief 
Goldfarb is on the radio and I believe he's 
talking to Chief Gombo who is in the south tower. 

Chief Goldfarb says, "Come on, Mary." 
I said, "Where are we going?" He said, "We're 
going into the south tower." It's customary we 
set up treatment and triage in the fire building. 
I look up and I said, "Chief, we're not going 
into this building. I said, Chief, the fucking 
shits going to fall," never anticipating the 
whole building but I just thought the floors up 
there . 

I said, "This is not an ordinary fire." 

He said, "Mary, calm down." He probably thought 
I was being hysterical. He was thinking I was 



M. MERCED 

being hysterical. I was just putting my foot 

|. 
He gets on the radio. I don't know 
what he spoke to Chief Gombo about. He said, 
"Come on." I said, 



I said, "We have off-duty people here. 
We have units here, they need supervision, 
they're running around. He looked at me. I 
don't know what he told Gombo. We collected 
people. I took this off-duty guy -- I don't 
remember his name -- so he could help with the 
command board. 

We also had Kevin Darnowski. He was 
off-duty but in uniform. He was on the way home 
when it happened, and his wife worked in the 
north tower on the 90th floor. He told me that 
his wife was in that building. I gave him a hug 
and I told him, I said, "Don't go in that 
building. You stay with me because she may have 
gone out . " 



M. MERCED 7 

All the time we saw debris falling, 
people either jumping or falling. 

Q. Where did you set the command board up? 

A. Okay. We went to -- fire had a command 
post across the street, right about here. 

Q. By Two World Financial? 

A. Maybe between here. 

Q. On the West Side Highway, somewhere 
near Two World Financial? 

A. Off the West Side Highway. So we were 
there. I set up my command board right by Fire, 
behind their' s. There was an underground 
driveway right behind them. That's where we 
were, outside. Then the chiefs were there. 
(Inaudible) so they can see what's what. 

Chief Goldfarb after a while, he says, 
"Mary, I want you to take everybody and move back 
into the entranceway to the underground 
driveway." So we did that. I'm over here trying 
to get units down. As a matter of fact, we had 
units down, that I put down on the command board 
that's still not erased. 

After a while he said, "You know what, 
I don't like the way this looks, Mary." He said, 



M. MERCED 8 

come, Mary, everybody, we're going to go." We 
went up to Vesey and West. We went up to Vesey 
and West. That's where we saw a lot of 
supervisors and units. 

All the while I'm like holding Kevin 
Darnowski's hand, because I didn't want him to go 
into that building. I knew if I let go of him, 
he would be gone. 

I look up at the north tower, and I see 
see colors all the way up there. I'm thinking to 
myself, geez, I said, is that clothes? I thought 
since the airplane crashed there, I'm thinking 
about maybe it's the clothes from the luggage or 
something. Then I see something else drop. Then 
I look. I see debris drop. And I look, and it 
was people. I could tell you almost every color 
clothing all the people that I saw fall had on, 
how they fell, if they tumbled, if they 
swan-dived. 

There was this one woman. She was 
dressed in white. | by this time, he was in 
shock, almost catatonic. He said, "Mary, do you 
see that woman falling in white? He said, my 
wife had the same clothes when she left this 



M. MERCED 



morning . 



^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^ had to because 
knew we were close to the buildings and some of 
the people falling, debris was falling, and I had 
to watch out for that. And the noise of the 
people hitting the ground. 

We were about ten yards from and the 
fire apparatus that was there, firemen and the 
ESU truck was there. We had set up a staging 
area with the buses on Vesey Street facing south. 

ESU, anyway, they threw us out of that 
intersection. They said, "We want everybody out. 
This is a tactical area." I didn't understand 
what that meant at that time, but I soon found 
out they expected some ground attack of some 
sort . 

The chief told us to go over in front 
of the American Express building, everybody set 
up their equipment and everything else in case we 
had any patients coming to this side. 

Q. When you set up by the American 
Express, you were still on the West Side Highway 



M. MERCED 10 

side or you were on Vesey Street? 

A. We were here. The buses were here. 

Q. On Vesey. 

A. Facing south on Vesey, for egress. The 
chief had everybody go in front of the American 
Express building with their equipment, stretchers 
and everything, you know, the usual stuff. After 
a while the chief says, "You know what? I want 
everybody inside the building. I want everybody 
inside. I don't want anybody outside the 
building . " 

As a matter of fact, Lillo was in our 
crowd initially. I'm thinking to myself -- I 
knew his wife was in there, probably (inaudible) . 
Quinn was a friend of mine too. 

Anyway, everybody went inside the 
building, and I took it to Captain (inaudible) . 
He works at Metrotech. He was with a group of 
supervisors. The chief and I, we were on West 
Street. We came back over this way. I tell you, 
all this time I don't hear any radio 
transmissions or anything. It was looking and 
doing automatically. I wasn't even so much 
concerned for my safety. We just do what we've 



M. MERCED 11 

got to do. 

All of a sudden, that's it, you hear 
the rumbling and it's getting louder and louder. 
I'm like, oh, shit. He said, "Mary, run!" I'm 
thinking, oh, shit, the building's falling. He's 
saying, "Mary, run!" 

We turned around and ran west on the 
West Side Highway. 

Q. You ran north? 

A. I'm sorry, this is north? I'm sorry. 

Q. On the West Side Highway? 

A. Yeah, so then the buses were facing 
the — 

Q. They were facing east or west? 

A. They were facing west. 

Anyway, we were running north. We got 
around the corner on Vesey Street, and there was 
an ambulance, like the last ambulance in the 
staging area, with the doors open. The chief 
jumped in there. But I had passed him, so I was 
like in front of the bus. I remember he said, 
"Mar." I turned around, and I'm looking at 
this -- 

I can't even explain this. Everything 



M. MERCED 12 

is like in slow motion, like time stood still and 
it was slow motion. But I knew I couldn't turn 
back and go to the bus, so I had to keep on 
running . 

So I'm running, and I'm worried about 
the chief, that he's there. Nobody expected 
those buildings to implode. They were thinking, 
it's going to topple. When it's falling, you 
think it's going to topple. Where is it going to 
go? 

So I'm running, and people are running 
in front of me. They stop. They turn around. I 
think everything's over with. So I stop, all of 
a sudden the thing is coming at us. It was like 
in dark hell, like a nuclear blizzard. I 
couldn't explain it. You couldn't see in front 
of you. You couldn't breathe. You're inhaling. 
You're coughing. You're running. You can't see 
anything . 

Once the building fell -- because you 
could hear it -- you couldn't hear anymore. 
Everything was silent. It was like if I was in a 
desert. I turned around and police officers are 
telling me, and other people, that we can't go 



M. MERCED 13 

back. I said, "I'm going back." I said, "The 
chief is over there, and I've got people over 
there and I've got to find them." 

So when I went back, the first person I 
saw like through this cloud is Danny Rivera from 
Battalion 31. I looked at him. We both were in 
shock, of course, like everybody was. I said, 
"Are you okay, Danny?" He said, "Yeah, Mary, I'm 
okay." I said, "Where are you going? Don't go 
back there, Danny." He said, "I've got to find 
my partner." Everybody was concerned about 
finding their partners. You know how it is. 

I'm on the radio trying to call the 
chief. He's not answering me. In the mean time 
I'm thinking about chemical and biological 
secondary devices or if it was there. There was 
a Hazollah bus, and I said, "Danny, come, we've 
got to get masks." We got masks. I was handing 
out masks. Whatever they had there, I gave them 
out to people. I don't know. 

So I'm calling the chief. He finally 
answers me. I said, "Are you okay?" He said, 
"Yeah, I'm fine." He asked me where I was. I 
had made it back up towards North End. They had 



M. MERCED 14 

I believe it's the Embassy Hotel Suites. We were 
there. Chief Kowalczyk was there, Mike Ober. He 
helps as an EMT at Battalion 39. Chief Villani, 
the guy in the MERV. Police officers, firemen, 
hacking, coughing. I had my water. I was 
sharing my water with the firemen, with 
civilians . 

Chief Goldfarb finally came. We just 
started taking care of patients. We just turned 
the lobby of the Embassy Hotel Suites into a 
treatment triage transport area or whatever. We 
had I think it was a fire chief who had a 
dislocated shoulder. We had burns to legs, 
people in shock, minor injuries, leg, arm, smoke. 

I remember they brought Gary Smiley 
from Battalion 31. They brought him on a 
stretcher. I believe he on -- he threw himself 
under one of the apparatuses when the building 
fell. I think some people got hosed down, so 
they brought him in. He was in shock, all wet 
and everything else. 

He wanted to quickly get off the 
stretcher to go back. I'm saying, "Gary --" 
Gary is hyper anyway. "Gary, you're not going 



M. MERCED 15 

anywhere." "No, I've got to go back." I know 
he's not thinking clearly. I said, "Gary, you 
made it out alive. Don't go back and do 
something stupid." I said, "Stay here. Regroup. 
You don't know what's going to hit next." 

It's a funny thing, because I forgot to 
mention when Danny Rivera and I made eye contact 
there was an airplane overhead. You couldn't see 
up in the sky. You couldn't see anything. 
Danny, myself and I'm sure everybody else, we 
were ducking like trying to see where it's going 
to hit. All the psychological games that come 
after all of this. At that time you didn't know 
whether it was going to hit or not. 

I remember during that time as well the 
only radio transmission that I heard was Captain 
Deshore's. When she said she was heading towards 
Jersey and she was injured along with some other 
M.O.S., she was in need of medical assistance and 
they were taking a lot of people over there. 
That's the only transmission I heard. Anything 
else, everything was dead. 

Chief Gombo was with us, with other 
chiefs as well, at the Embassy Hotel Suites. 



M. MERCED 16 

They don't know what's going on, what's going to 
happen next, rather. So we had some people 
transported off the scene to hospitals, and the 
chiefs, they met and they discussed what their 
next plan was going to be. 

I remember the chiefs were in front of 
the Embassy Hotel Suites, and I'm there. I said, 
"Chief, I hear the rumbling noise. The other 
building's going to fall." He said, "I don't 
hear anything, Mary." I said, "Chief, the other 
building's going to fall." The other chiefs are 
looking at me like I'm going crazy. I said, 
"Chief Goldfarb, you know I have a keen sense of 
hearing. The other building is going to fall." 

Sure enough, another 30 seconds later, 
it got louder and louder. Then everybody is 
going to run, because we didn't see where the 
building toppled because we didn't know it 
imploded because you couldn't see anything. 

So now we're running, and we go back 
inside the building here and you couldn't go past 
the Embassy Hotel Suites because you could see 
the World Trade Center from there too. It's a 
big open area on the other side. So we ran back 



M. MERCED 17 

in there and moved everybody to the left of the 
lobby, because they have an atrium there on the 
right, in case it topples on top of that 
building . 

So we were there, and it fell. Of 
course more smoke, more stuff, papers everywhere. 
We got a little bit more patients. The chiefs, 
they do what they do, and I'm helping people, as 
well as the other medics, EMTs . Then some of the 
chiefs disappeared. I don't know where they went 
to. 

Then we heard that there was a gas leak 
in the hotel, so we had to evacuate there. So we 
evacuated there, and we headed north on North 
End. That's when Chief Gombo -- they decided 
Chief Goldfarb would go with Chief Gombo to 1 PP 
because there was no more -- 7 Metrotech, because 
there was no more OEM over there. 

So that's where we went. We went along 
with Lieutenant Terranova. That's his name; 
right? 

Q. Ross Terranova? 

A. Ross, yes, Terranova. 

Q. I noticed that you said 7 Metrotech, 



M. MERCED 18 

but you meant Seven World Trade -- right -- where 
OEM is? 

A. Yeah, I'm sorry. 

Q. That's okay. 

A. I'm sorry. Good thing you picked it 
up. I didn't realize it. 

We went to 1 PP, Chief Gombo along with 
Chief Goldfarb, made decisions and stuff like 
that. So that's where we were. We didn't sleep. 
The chief and I went back -- that same night we 
went back to the site. There was an EMS 
operation . 

Q. At Vesey and West? 

A. No. 

Q. Chambers and West? 

A. Chambers and West. Yeah, at Chambers 
and West. We were there like every day. Then we 
hear that people are missing. They had the chief 
and I missing. Then the frustration not knowing 
who's missing, who's here, who's not. 

It happened, and I was down there 
yesterday. I know it happened, but it still 
hasn't registered. I'm pissed at my job for the 
lack of support. Just the fact that everyone 



M. MERCED 



19 



(inaudible), my family, everyone's family, I'm 
sure. I mean, we've seen how much support we've 
gotten throughout the United States and the 
country, which is great. 



|lt's ironic because during this whole 
incident I wasn't even concerned about my safety. 

I'm here now and I'm not like -- while 
I'm lucky to be alive, I had a brush with death, 
you know, I don't even think about it that way. 
We all did what we had to do, everybody down 
there. I've gained respect for many people, many 
people, and lost some for some. 

It's going to take a while for 
everybody to heal because the scars are what's 
going to remain. 



M. MERCED 2 



never take my cell phone with me on the job. I 
always leave it in my purse or in the car. This 
day I took it. I didn't even think about it. 

My ex-husband called me on the phone. 
He said, "You're there, aren't you?" That day he 
had to pick up the girls for his visitation. He 
said, "You're there, aren't you?" I said, "You 
cannot believe what I'm looking at. You won't 
believe it." I said, "You know what? Tell the 
kids that I love them. I don't know when I'm 
coming home . " 

I knew it was going to be a long 
operation. My family didn't hear from me until 
that night because the phones were down, the 
cells were down. Even my childhood friends 
called my mother, and my daughter who lives 
upstate, she was frantic. 

But I thank God that decisions that 
were made that day, even by Chief Goldfarb, 
putting those people in there. It would have 
been worse because we had 50 people easy. It 
would have been much worse. 



M. MERCED 



21 



But support that I've seen. I know 
everybody -- who knows, maybe everybody gets 
television, especially something of this 
magnitude. But, you know, the dust has settled. 
We should get better, but I don't see that and I 
don't feel it and I don't feel support. I really 
don ' t . 



M. MERCED 22 

By the way, | | wife, she was safe 
in Brooklyn Hospital. He was a wreck. 
Unfortunately Lillo went in the building. Aside 
from that, he was working. As you saw in the 
pictures, he was working anyway. Quinn, a buddy 
of mine, that's how he is. I would have done the 
same thing. I would have done the same thing. 
Even though I was on light duty, I would have 
done the same thing. 

(Tape ended abruptly.) 



File No. 9110145 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMS CHIEF ZACHARY GOLDFARB 
Interview Date: October 23, 2001 



Transcribed by Nancy Francis 



Z. GOLDFARB 

MR. ECCLESTON: Today's date is October 23rd, 
2001. The time is 2318 hours and this is Christopher 
Eccleston of the New York City Fire Department, World 
Trade Center Task Force. I am conducting an interview 
in regards to the events of September 11th, 2001, with 
the following individual: 

Please state your name, rank, and assigned 
command . 

CHIEF GOLDFARB: Zachary Goldfarb, EMS Deputy 
Chief assigned to Division 3. 

Q. Chief Goldfarb, were you working on the 
morning of September 11th, 2001? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Were you assigned to the World Trade Center 
disaster? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Can you please tell me the details of the 
day? 

A. Yes. We were actually working starting from 
the night before. We started working on the 10th at 
2200 as car 6 Charlie EMS Citywide chief. I had a 
relatively uneventful shift and we stayed here in our 
office in Division 3 at the end of the tour for a 
little while. We were in a meeting with some staff 



Z. GOLDFARB 

people here. We left here somewhere around 0830 and 
were heading home, basically, heading off duty. 

As we were heading out on Linden Boulevard, 
monitoring police special operations frequency, we 
heard someone scream over the police radio, Central, a 
commercial aircraft just hit the World Trade Center. 
Immediately I picked up the EMS Citywide radio and told 
the dispatcher to assign us to the job. I don't even 
think they knew at that moment that there was a job 
because it was just instantaneous and we spun around 
and started heading out Linden Boulevard. 

Do you want to know our route of travel or 
any of that? 

Q. Sure. 

A. We headed west on Linden Boulevard from -- we 
were just about at Pennsylvania Avenue, so we headed 
west on Linden Boulevard from Pennsylvania Avenue. I 
was anticipating morning inbound rush-hour traffic to 
begin with let alone a problem with the Trade Center, 
and then I was anticipating that the Battery Tunnel 
would probably be open and clear for us to get 
through. So I said to my aide, Mary Merced, I said 
let's go out and take the streets down to the Battery 
Tunnel and we should be able to get through the tunnel 



Z. GOLDFARB 

and stay off the highway because knowing from how these 
types of events unfold that the highway tends to get 
messed up. 

So we went west on Linden, continued out, hit 
the traffic circle by Prospect Park, went around, got 
onto the Prospect Expressway westbound for about two 
exits because we could see it was blocked up, jumped 
off down to the streets and worked the streets down to 
Hamilton Avenue right down into the mouth of the 
tunnel. We made really good time, I think, given the 
distance and the circumstances. 

As we got to the Prospect Expressway, that 
was where we saw the first sight of the towers. At 
that point my impression was that the first plane had 
hit but not the second plane. As best as I can 
remember, there was one tower burning and you could see 
a huge volume of fire and a lot of damage, and our 
immediate assessment was this was going to be a major 
event. Actually, we used some other words, but I don't 
want to put them on tape. 

During the course of our trip, my feeling 
was, I was the Citywide chief and I was still logged on 
as the Citywide chief. I didn't know what other chief 
officers might have been on duty in the morning, but 



Z. GOLDFARB 

clearly this needed some heads-up activity. So while 
Mary was driving, I was on the phone with the Citywide 
dispatch supervisor giving him some direction, and 
among the direction I gave him was to set up task 
forces in each borough consisting -- I believe I told 
him ten ambulances and an officer in each borough for a 
total of 50 and to mobilize them at two crossing points 
but hold them fast because I didn't know what we were 
going to need. 

I have to tell you that at this point there 
was no thought at all given on my part to this being 
anything other than an accident of some sort. Despite 
training and I think a very high level of consciousness 
about terrorism and things of that nature, it didn't 
occur to me at that point in time that this was any 
kind of an attack, just some sort of an event where a 
plane hit the building. 

It was an absolute beautiful day. The sky 
was just a perfect blue and not a cloud in the sky. 
Heavy smoke plumed up coming off the north tower. So 
we came by Hamilton Avenue. 

As I was saying, I was on the phone with I 
think it was Larry Tobin, who was the Citywide dispatch 
supervisor, and I was giving him some direction. I 



Z. GOLDFARB 

broke off with him, then I called him back. I told him 
to activate our regional mutual aid agreement with the 
Office of Emergency Management. I told him to activate 
our agreement with the Private Ambulance Association 
and mobilize all our mutual aid agreements and get 
everybody moving because it was obvious that this would 
be a very large patient-producing event. 
Unfortunately, it didn't work out that way. Actually, 
it did work out that way. Anyway. . . 

But those were the things we were putting in 
place on the way in. Now, I don't know what other 
direction anyone else was giving. Among other things I 
told him was everybody off the radio. I just wanted 
EMS officers on the radio and nobody else. So, again, 
I don't know what other direction he might have been 
getting, but he was certainly listening to the stuff I 
was telling him, and Larry and I work very well 
together . 

So we got to the tunnel. There was already a 
line, a whole procession of emergency vehicles lined up 
trying to get into the tunnel. My aide is very good at 
dodging traffic, so we kind of wove our way around and 
drove right into the tunnel, and we got about halfway 
through the tunnel and traffic was stopped. We were in 



Z. GOLDFARB 

the Manhattan bound lane, but it was two-way traffic. 
We tried to get around them into the oncoming lane, but 
there's really no wiggle room in that tunnel, it's very 
tight, and everything was stopped dead. 

One thing I remember is that everybody had 
their sirens on and, of course, the tunnel is not a 
place for a siren and nothing was moving, so it was 
very noisy in there. So after seeing that we were 
stopped dead for a couple of minutes and there were 
police officers out on foot in front of us, I felt that 
we were really kind of close to Manhattan. 

So, as Mary knows, I have no tolerance for 
sitting in traffic when I have somewhere to be. So I 
said sit here, I'm going to get out and pull the 
traffic, and it was my intent to find my way to the 
front of this line and pull it so that we can get out 
of that tunnel because we needed to be out. Also, 
while we were in the tunnel we were off the radio, so I 
didn't know what was going on. 

So I walked up somewhat to where there was a 
police officer and he told me that traffic was blocked 
up because of the blockage on West Street and they're 
working on it but we weren't able to get out just yet. 
So at that point I sort of had to acknowledge that I 



Z. GOLDFARB 

guess we weren't moving very far for a few minutes and 
I walked back to the car, and on my way -- actually, on 
my way up to the police officer in a car a few car 
lengths in front of us was one of our off-duty medics, 
and I don't remember his name right at the moment, but 
Mary will know in a second and she's probably telling 
Christine right now. 

He rolled down his window very panicked and 
he was like chief, chief, and I recognized him. I just 
can't remember his name at the moment. Darnowski. One 
of the two Darnowskis, Kevin or Jim, one of them. I'm 
like what's up? He said my wife is in that building. 
I got to get to her. I said listen. Try and relax. 
We'll be out of the tunnel in few minutes. When we get 
out, follow me in to the job, stay with me, we'll find 
your wife. Very unnerving kind of situation. 

Then, as I was walking back from the police 
officer, a woman runs up to me and, again, we're in the 
middle of the Battery Tunnel here. A woman runs up to 
me and the woman is completely hysterical and she's 
screaming. You've got to help me. You've got to help 
me. I said what's the matter? She said my son is in 
the car and he can't breathe. What's wrong with your 
son? Her son had a tracheostomy and she said it was 



Z. GOLDFARB 

clogged, and I look toward her car, which was a few car 
lengths behind us, and I can see that there is a boy, a 
child in the back seat of the car in his car seat, and 
he's awake and breathing but maybe he looked like he 
was in a little distress. 

I'm thinking to myself I need to be at this 
Trade Center. How can I drive away from this little 
boy? We're stuck here in the tunnel anyway. Maybe 
I'll take Darnowski and tell Darnowski to go help this 
little boy while we pull out of the tunnel, and even as 
I'm having these thoughts, traffic opens up and now we 
have to move because we're in the column. So I said to 
the lady, we're moving out of the tunnel now. Keep 
going out of the tunnel. As soon as you get out, make 
a left and drive around to the hospital. She said 
okay. Apparently she was on her way to the doctor or 
to the hospital at the time. So I was like all right, 
that's one less thing to worry about. 

So I told Darnowski get in his car, follow 
us. Traffic moves up. We pull out. We pull out onto 
West Street and this is like -- it's funny because it's 
almost like you thought it wouldn't get worse. Of 
course, we've seen it got a lot worse. But it was real 
bad. A lot of apparatus. At this point the second 



10 

Z. GOLDFARB 



tower is going. Huge fire. Huge. You know, in 
retrospect, I look back and I say we should have 
thought those towers might not hold. There was a huge 
volume of fire. But, you know, it was so far up that 
it's almost away. It's like you can't really get a 
measure of it. So there was a lot of fire, there was 
debris in the street, body parts in the street, people 
all over the place, and you kind of tunnel in a little 
bit, you know? 

So we're driving down and I'm thinking of all 
the stuff I want to bring from the car out to the 
scene. Mary, as she always says, where do you want me 
to stop? I'm like, all right, just keep pulling up. 
We're now going northbound on West Street. Let me 
refer to the map. So West Street is a divided street 
here and we're in the northbound lanes going north and 
we're weaving away and the cops or traffic folks, 
whatever, they're doing a pretty good job of moving 
traffic along. 

At some point, I want to say probably around 
Albany Street, I guess, we cross over. There's a break 
in the median and we cross over, so now we're going 
northbound on the southbound side. There's stuff 
coming off the building. So we stopped -- I think our 



11 



Z. GOLDFARB 



final stopping place was south of the pedestrian 
bridge. I'm trying to get this right. Maybe somewhere 
around Cedar Street, but we're on the west side of West 
Side Highway parked up against the curb facing north, 
and we're south of this pedestrian bridge. The staging 
area that they had transmitted was Vesey and West, and 
there was no way we were going to get up there and 
there was no way to walk around it, and it was a good 
stopping place and there were plenty of other people 
and, quite honestly, if the building hadn't collapsed, 
I'm sure it probably would have been fine. 

Q. Can you just indicate on the map where you 
had parked your car? To the best of your memory. 

A. I'm want to say somewhere like here. 

Q. Okay. 

A. Something like that. 

Q. Okay. 

A. So we get out of the car and there's stuff 
coming off the buildings. There's people coming off 
the building. We go around and we have a routine. We 
always try and do everything by routine because my 
feeling is, when you do everything by routine, then 
when there's a real crisis, you just follow the 
routine. I mean, I teach a lot, as you know. People 



12 
Z. GOLDFARB 



do in a crisis what they do every day. So even in our 
routine, garden variety MCIs and responses, we always 
follow the same protocol, take the same equipment. We 
approach everything in the same way, very standard. So 
we pulled on the scene, we gave an 84 on the KDT. We 
got out of the vehicle. I said, okay, we're going to 
take the command board, we're going to take the vests. 

The funny thing about the vests, because 
we've been carrying these command vests, I've been 
carrying them for years, since before we merged, and we 
had them made over after the merge and they said FDNY 
on them, but we have never deployed them, and when we 
set up the new car the day before, Mary was like, why 
are you carrying these vests? Why do you keep carrying 
them, chief? You'll never need them. I said, well, 
you know, one day there will be a big job and then 
we'll really wish we had them, so we're going to keep 
carrying them. Then here we are the next day and we 
needed the vests. So it's very strange. 

Another strange little vignette I'll tell you 
is that when we started our 6 Charlie work that week, 
which was Sunday night, Saturday night, Sunday Tour 1, 
I said to Mary, I think -- she said do we have any 
plans for this week? I said I think what I want to do 



13 
Z. GOLDFARB 



this week is I want to do inspections on all the MERVs 
and LSUs and I want to prepare a report for Chief Gombo 
of what their hardware stock levels are because I just 
somehow have a gut feeling that they're not at a level 
that we think they are, you know, ready to respond to a 
big event. 

So on Sunday Tour 1 we went to Bellevue and 
checked Manhattan's MERV and LSU, inspected it, 
documented it, I'm sorry I'm off by a day, on Monday 
Tour 1 we went to Manhattan. On Tuesday Tour 1, the 
morning of this event, we were in Queens. At 4:00 a.m. 
I had Mike Sheridan out of his office and we got the 
LSU running and checking all the stuff. In fact, when 
I saw Sheridan a couple weeks ago, he said, boy, you 
had a premonition? I said you know what? I have no 
idea if I had a premonition or not, but just something 
was nagging me about those MERVs and LSUs. 

So anyway, we pull up at the scene, get out 
of our car, we start to gear up in our safety coats and 
our helmets and stuff, which is just routine for us, we 
take our radios. One of the things that was 
interesting was that, thinking independently, you know, 
we have our department cell phone and usually we get 
out at a scene and she takes the cell phone. 



14 
Z. GOLDFARB 



Independently, both of us opted to take our own 
personal cell phones with us. In my mind, I had been 
thinking, I know the Department cell phone is on AT&T, 
which isn't always the most reliable, mine is on 
Verizon, if something big is going on at the Trade 
Center, you know, I might need the one as an 
alternative to the other, so I grabbed my private one 
and she apparently thought also of taking her private 
one. So we both left the car with three cell phones 
between us as well as all our standard radio 
equipment. We went to the trunk, took out the command 
board and the vest set, and the command board is a big 
thing, so we're dragging this thing. 

Okay. So we get out of the car and we start 
making our way over to the Fire command post. I have 
to tell you that I can't for the life of me tell you 
how I knew where it was. I just don't remember. But 
we weren't dodging around. We went straight forward to 
the Fire command post, maybe we just saw it, which was 
in -- there's a parking garage that I think is right 
here. I'm depicting just south of the north pedestrian 
bridge, which would be between Winter Garden entrance 
and 3 World Financial Center. I think that there's a 
driveway. I think this is the placement of it, but 



15 
Z. GOLDFARB 



it's somewhere in here between these buildings. But I 
think the driveway is here. It's like a divided 
driveway to an underground garage and that was where 
Fire command post was set up. 

So we walk along here and make our way to 
the -- you know what? I'm thinking maybe it was here. 
One of these two places. You can go there and look 
where it is, okay? But wherever that Fire command post 
was, that's where we went. It's one of those two 
places. So we're walking along and along the way 
Darnowski hooked up with us and said he was coming with 
us and we picked up another I say stray because there 
was a lot of this going along. We picked up another 
off-duty member who we recognized, Mary probably knows 
who it was, I don't remember, and told him to come with 
us. So our jolly band of paras went over to the 
command post. 

We got to the command post. Chief Ganci was 
there. There was no EMS representation at all at the 
Fire command post. Nobody was there. A Field Com was 
there. They had set up the table. Now, I knew at this 
point that Chief Gombo was on the scene and I think I 
was under the impression he had taken command. So I 
told Mary -- again, we have a standard approach to 



16 
Z. GOLDFARB 



this. So I told her all right, set up the command 
board, let's start documenting who is here and get the 
information, start setting up command. I knew there 
was command on the scene and I wasn't trying to take 
command but rather just get the information to support 
command. I called on the command frequency to command 
and I think it was Ross Terranova that answered the 
radio. I think he was working with Chief Gombo, and I 
said we're on the scene, we're at the fire command 
post, what's your pleasure? So he said stand by, and 
then he came back at some point and said report to the 
lobby of building 2. 

Then in the meantime, during this lag of 
time, I said a couple words to Chief Ganci. He was 
being very frustrated about his radio. I remember 
this. He was like what's that? What channel is this? 
Am I on the right channel? Goddamn it, the radios 
aren't working. He was very frustrated about his 
radio. Chief Ingram, Bob Ingram, was there and I 
talked to him briefly. Chief Burns was there and the 
Field Com crew, a bunch of other people, no EMS 
people. So I said okay, I'm here, you know, I'm 
reporting and I'm here, whatever you guys need, and 
they basically didn't have anything to tell me, I 



17 
Z. GOLDFARB 



guess. So I had Mary set up the command board and 
start documenting who was on the scene. 

So she started doing that. She had the two 
tagalongs helping her, and I'm looking out at the scene 
and there was stuff coming down. In fact, when we got 
out of the car, there was a lot of stuff coming down 
and I have to say that I was a little bit fearful that 
we were going to get hit with something coming down, 
you know, there was debris, there were I guess what I 
later learned were pieces of people coming down off the 
building. We got out of the car and Mary was like 
transfixed. She was just staring at this thing. 

One of the things that I've learned over time 
is sometimes it's better not to look at stuff because 
sometimes you don't want to see things, you know? You 
see them, you start thinking about them, and then you 
can't do your job. But, of course, the downside is 
sometimes there's stuff that you don't see that you 
need to see. So anyway, Mary is just transfixed and I 
remember I had to tell her about five times, you know, 
we're prepared, let's go. She was just -- I don't 
know. It was like, come on, Mary, let's go, and so we 
went, we proceeded on. 

So as we're standing at the Fire command post 



18 
Z. GOLDFARB 



looking at that stuff, you know, we're looking at 
what's going on, I told her and the other two guys, I 
said get in under the mouth of the garage. Everybody 
else was on the tarmac almost like at the curb -- not 
at the curb but kind of midway between the garage 
entrance and the curb where they were operating, and I 
said get under the overhang of the building so that 
you'll be shielded from stuff coming down. So they 
went down there and did that. 

So I call command, as I said, and they tell 
me the chief says report to the lobby of building 2. 
So I called down to Mary. I was standing at the 
command area and Mary and the other two were down under 
this overhang and I called Mary and said come on, get 
the stuff, we're going over to the lobby of building 2, 
and I start to walk out to the street and my aide, who 
certainly earned her living watching my backside that 
day, looks up and sees stuff coming off this building 
and me, I mean, I don't know how far I actually would 
have gone, but I was prepared to follow orders and 
charge across the street and she was like, chief, you 
can't go across the street, there's debris coming down, 
I was like, come on, Mary, let's go. We've got to 
report to Chief Gombo, and she got upset with me. She 



19 
Z. GOLDFARB 



was like, listen, you can't go across the fucking 
street, there's fucking debris coming down, and at that 
point, I guess, I looked up and I realized that she was 
right. There was like a shower of stuff coming off 
this building. 

I have to tell you that standing below this 
building where we were standing looking up at a fire 
that was -- I don't even know what floor the fire was 
on, 80 or 50 or 70 or something like that. We didn't 
appreciate the extent of damage to the building that 
you would have appreciated if you were standing in 
Brooklyn or Jersey City looking at it, and in 
retrospect -- and I think about this day and night, but 
in retrospect, I think it's possible that the command, 
personnel in command, if they could have seen what you 
would see from Brooklyn, might have had a different 
assessment of the hazards of the building than what you 
could see from the street because you're basically 
looking straight up a vertical cliff, two vertical 
cliffs, and you're seeing the bottom of some smoke and 
fire and you see debris or whatever, but I don't think 
you had a full appreciation of the extent of damage, 
how many floors, the size of damage. Now, they may 
have had other sources of information for that. I 



20 
Z. GOLDFARB 



don't know. But this is just my own assessment and I 
have no other source of information. 

So anyway, I heeded my bodyguard and I called 
command back on the radio and said we're not able to 
make it across the street at this point. I'm at the 
Fire command post. There's no EMS representation 
here. Do you want me to take a liaison role here? He 
said okay, ten four. So I do that. So I come back 
to -- I guess a deputy from Division 1 was there and I 
just said okay, I'm here as your liaison, tell me what 
you need, and in the meantime my team was working on 
getting an assessment of what we have on the scene and 
they started writing up the command board, which is 
still downstairs written up and everything. 

We were there, I don't know, five or ten 
minutes and then Chief Kowalczyk reports to the command 
post. As we had left Brooklyn, as we were heading out 
of Brooklyn, I called him on the phone, he was here in 
the office, and I told him, I said, Walter, big job, 
World Trade Center, we need you, come on out. But he 
was already moving. I think he heard the second alarm 
transmitted and he was already moving. So he reported 
to the Fire command post and I briefed him on what I 
had known, the little information I had at that point, 



21 
Z. GOLDFARB 



and he said okay. He said go down to Vesey and West 
and take command there of operations on Vesey and 
West. 

I have to tell you that at this point, up 
until this point, I'm saying to myself, I know this 
job. I've been here before. I was there in '93. I 
was the south tower commander in '93. I've seen this 
building in peril, I've seen a thousand patients. I 
mean, there's nothing freaky about it. It's just a big 
job. Okay. We've done big jobs. I do this. So I 
think that -- maybe I'm projecting now -- many of us 
were thinking that kind of thought. So he tells me go 
down to Vesey and West and take charge there. Okay. 

So I leave the Fire command post and I 
proceed now north on -- I take my little band of 
warriors and we proceed north on West Street up to the 
corner of Vesey and West. We're in the southbound 
lanes of travel walking. We encounter probably about, 
right around here, we encounter about 40 or 50 EMS 
providers with stretchers and equipment and all sorts 
of stuff just standing, basically, not engaged in 
anything, just standing by waiting for instructions 
right here in the southbound lanes of traffic just 
along the median. 



22 
Z. GOLDFARB 



I see Jace Pinkus is there with them and I 
think Howie Hahn, who is a lieutenant, I think it was 
Howie Hahn he was with, and the scene over here was 
basically these streets were kind of clear because 
there was stuff coming down. North of Vesey on West 
Street were lines of ambulances and apparatus parked 
here or staged here or trying to get through here or 
stuff like that and there were all these members on the 
street, and they weren't treating patients. There were 
no patients apparent at that point in time. So I 
called all the officers together, which I think it was 
Pinkus and Hahn and I'm not sure of what other officers 
there were. It was just sort of a motley crew. There 
were EMS guys and voluntary guys and Hatzolah guys and 
numerous other people that looked like they were part 
of an ambulance team. 

I called them together and I told them that I 
was taking command of Vesey and West and that I wanted 
to set up a triage and treatment area, and I told them 
to set it up in front of, that is to say, on the east 
side of 3 World Financial Center, on the street there. 
There's a pretty large, open kind of climate over 
there. I told them I wanted them to set up over 
there. I told them I wanted them to clear the street 



23 
Z. GOLDFARB 



and I said be aware that there was debris coming down 
from the buildings, so hug the building as close as you 
can, 3 World Financial Center. I told Captain Pinkus 
to make sure he had accountability of the people who 
were in this area, all of these people are now his, so 
you've got Hahn and whatever other officer might have 
been there. I said go over there and establish 
accountability and prepare to set up to treat 
patients . 

My strategy at that point was that we would 
be getting patients probably coming out of 1 World 
Trade Center trying to evacuate and the injured there, 
we would handle them there. At this point I was not 
thinking of triage and treatment in the lobby of 1 
World Trade Center. I didn't feel that it was safe to 
be operating on West Street, you know, on the street or 
close to the front of the building, so I wouldn't have 
committed anybody at that point. Remember I had 
already made the decision not to go first to 2, so we 
weren't going to go across to 1. So I pull them up 
against the building. 

Charlie Wells comes in and he wasn't really 
reporting to me. He was kind of moving past me, I 
guess. I think he had already some other marching 



24 
Z. GOLDFARB 



order. But he had came in from the north going south 
and he stopped at my area. I told him -- maybe we 
talked for just a minute and I sort of exchanged 
information with him and said do you have a mission? 
He said he was reporting to the command post or 
something like that and he continued on. Commissioner 
Von Essen came by that way and I saw him and I talked 
to him just for a second and he went on to the command 
post . 

Then I called Pinkus on the radio and said -- 
no, wait. Before this I think Chief Villani came down 
and -- let me back up. Wells came down and said he's 
here with a number of ambulances, he's got a bunch of 
ambulances staged north of Vesey Street on West. So I 
told him, okay, have the crews report here. We're 
setting up triage and treatment. Then he went on to 
the command post. 

Then the next person I saw was Villani. 
Chief Villani reported to me and I said do you have an 
assignment? He said no. I said okay. I said would 
you do me a favor? Recon to see if we can stage on 
Vesey Street off of West heading west and if there's a 
way to get out so that we can cycle our rigs out of 
there without having to recommit to West Street because 



25 
Z. GOLDFARB 



West Street was getting blocked quicker. So he went to 
recon and ultimately he got back to me and said yes, we 
can go out North End Avenue, there are already some 
rigs up there, and he was going to set up that staging 
for me on Vesey to North End and that would have been 
the egress route for those rigs so you'd be clear of 
West Street debris. 

Along the same time frame, I called Pinkus on 
the radio and I tell him I don't like the looks of 
things coming off the building. I said recon the lobby 
of 3 World Financial Center, see if we can set up 
triage and treatment in the lobby there for a casualty 
collection point. So Pinkus reports back to me that, 
yes, we're able to do that. I tell him okay, get 
everybody inside the building under cover, everybody in 
the lobby, let me know when they're starting to 
establish accountability for the people. So he goes 
ahead and does that. 

So now basically I'm on this corner and my 
recollection is that the street was kind of -- it 
wasn't like hugely packed with people. It was kind of 
empty, some cops and some firemen and us, and a cop 
comes over wearing heavy tactical gear and starts 
shouting at us, this is tactical area, clear the area. 



26 
Z. GOLDFARB 



What I found out days later was that the sergeant on 6 
Truck, his name is Sullivan, I think, he was on TV, had 
at some point made a determination that this was a 
terrorist attack and began to think what if there's 
ground troops also, I don't know, if this is supported 
by some kind of a ground attack and here are all these 
cops in heavy vests clearing the streets. 

So anyway, he starts shouting at us this is a 
tactical area, clear the area, and not just at us but 
everyone that was there. So we had actually moved onto 
Vesey. We were really right at the corner of Vesey and 
West. Pinkus calls me back and tells me everybody is 
under cover, they have no patients, all the people are 
accounted for, there's plenty of space in the lobby, 
they're back from the windows. So I felt comfortable 
with that. So at that point I have accountability for 
what's going on. They have no patient contact. I'm 
really starting to wonder where the patients are. 

We're standing on the corner and I'm standing 
here and Mary is here, the MERV is here, there was a 
line of ambulances here that are staged pointing west 
and we're about a car length apart from each other and 
I was looking up Vesey Street and she was looking at 
the building watching people coming out of the 



27 
Z. GOLDFARB 



building, and all of a sudden I hear her say, oh, my 
God, chief, it's coming down. I turn and I look up and 
the building was coming down, and all you saw was this 
huge cloud. I mean, I didn't see the building coming 
down. I just saw a cloud of (inaudible) coming down, 
just a big black cloud. So I was like, let's go. I 
knew the people in my area were clear, but we were just 
near enough. So I'm like, let's go, and she was just 
transfixed. She's like, oh, my God. I'm like, Mary, 
let's go. 

So we start running west on Vesey Street and 
she outdistances me, and as we were running, I saw -- 
remember I told you this was a beautiful day and it's 
like suddenly dark, like a thunderstorm brews, you 
know, suddenly it's like big, gray clouds, and it's 
almost a feeling that something is overtaking me is I 
guess the way I would describe it. Mary runs past me, 
but I guess we're kind of running together, and all of 
a sudden I look up and I see an ambulance in front of 
me, back doors open, no stretcher, kind of saying hop 
in here. So I did. And I'm calling to Mary, come on, 
thinking there's some shelter there. She had already 
come around the side of the ambulance, so she was 
already past me when she heard me. She just decided 



28 
Z. GOLDFARB 



she was going to keep on going. But now I'm committed 
to the ambulance. 

So I jump in, slammed the doors. It seemed 
reasonable at the time. I have no idea actually how I 
got from the street into the ambulance because 
obviously I made it inside, but my legs were hurting 
for two days after or three days. So I must have 
projected myself somehow. I don't know. 

So now I'm in the ambulance and I hear stuff, 
you know, debris hitting the roof and stuff coming down 
on the truck and you look out the window and there's 
just swirling clouds of gray and it's getting darker. 
I'm like this is pretty cool, I've got a little shelter 
here, and then I realize there's stuff starting to come 
into the truck. So I'm like why? I closed the door. 
This is kind of just going through my mind. I was very 
calm about this whole thing. So I look up in the cab, 
and it was a voluntary ambulance and I know it was 
because you could walk through into the cab, which is 
probably a good thing. So I look in the cab and I see 
that both windows were rolled down, power windows. 
Hey, the truck is running. So I powered both windows 
up and that stopped it somewhat, but it was coming in 
through the vents and I realized the AC was on. So I 



29 
Z. GOLDFARB 



shut the AC off. So now the windows are up, the AC is 
off, doors closed, and it was better. But I'm coughing 
already, you know, there's stuff coming up. So I'm 
like this is not good. 

A good question might be why didn't I think 
to just drive the ambulance away? I never thought of 
it. But what I did think of was, hey, I'm in an 
ambulance. If there's oxygen, I'll put a mask on, then 
I'll be able to breathe no matter what comes around the 
ambulance. So I got an oxygen mask out, I started 
looking for the valve to turn on the oxygen, and I'm 
looking for something thinking, if something comes 
crashing through the roof, I know it's only a sheet of 
aluminum, maybe this wasn't such a bright place to be 
after all, I'm looking for a back board or something to 
get under, but there was nothing in there. 

I look out the window and I'm thinking should 
I try and make a run for it or run further? But 
there's all this stuff going on outside like a nuclear 
snowstorm. It was unbelievable. Unbelievable. Stuff 
like da-da-da-da-da pounding on the roof of the truck. 
So I just kind of scrunched up on the floor with my 
oxygen mask under that arch between the cab and the 
walk-through thinking that might be the strongest roof 



30 
Z. GOLDFARB 



point, and I just kind of scrunched up there and I had 
protective gear on and I said, you know, I hope I'm 
able to get out of this. I remember it was really 
quiet. There was no screaming on the radio. There was 
really nothing going on on the radios. It was just -- 
it was quiet . 

So after some period of time, I don't know, 
minutes, seconds, I have no idea, after some period of 
time it sort of lightened up outside. So I said, hmmm, 
it looks like I can get out. So I got out of the 
truck. There was a lot of stuff floating around, but I 
could see and get out. So my next thought was -- well, 
you know, before I even got out of the truck I was 
thinking of Mary and she was contacting me, she was 
calling me on the radio, and I called her. I said I'm 
okay. Are you okay? She said, yeah, I'm okay. I said 
where are you? She tells me she's up the block. I 
said okay, good. I said I'm going to regroup, try and 
get our treatment area back up, if it isn't up, in the 
lobby of 3. So then she tells me or we discover that 
one of the buildings we think had collapsed. You 
really couldn't tell because there was just clouds and 
smoke, but it was like it wasn't there. I can't begin 
to tell you how weird this thing was and what a strange 



31 
Z. GOLDFARB 



feeling this was. 

So I go into 3 and I find Pinkus. I think I 
talked to him on the radio first and then I find him 
and he tells me everybody is okay, we're all accounted 
for, no problem with that, and I'm saying, my God, if I 
hadn't taken these guys off the street, they would have 
all been under this thing. That still freaks me out. 
That still freaks me out. It would have been an awful 
lot of guys. So thank God they're all okay. 
Q. Good command decision. 
A. Lucky command decision. 

In fact, he did tell me, when I saw Jace a 
couple weeks afterwards, he told me that -- I can't 
remember. I think he told me Quinn had been with our 
group at one point and then afterwards wasn't there 
anymore. Quinn 's wife was the one who worked in Tower 
1, I think? Maybe I'm confused. But he had apparently 
left the group to go strike out after -- to try to find 
his wife at some point, and that was the one member 
that we didn't have accountability for after. 

So anyway, the lobby of 3 World Financial 
Center kind of wraps around the building here. So 
originally they were operating here. Now everything is 
full of -- there's windows broken and there's debris on 



32 
Z. GOLDFARB 



the east side. The structure seemed like it was 
stable. So we decide to pull everything over to the 
west side of the lobby around the corner. 

The strangest thing, because they must have 
been having been some kind of reception in the lobby of 
this building, they had tables lined up with bottled 
water. Go figure. There were cases of bottled water, 
and it was just what we needed was bottled water and 
here they are, cases of bottled water. So people were 
coming in and there was plenty of bottled water to wash 
your eyes or get them a drink and people are coughing 
and choking. 

So I tell Pinkus get his people and start 
moving them to the west side of that lobby. Am I 
talking too much? 

Q. No. You're doing great. 

A. The next thing I remember is Mark Stone comes 
in completely covered with debris, completely freaked 
out, coughing. He's like, he said, Kowalczyk's trapped 
under there. I said what do you mean? He said 
Kowalczyk was with me, he said, and when the thing came 
down, we started running and I looked back and he was 
gone. He's trapped under there. I was like, you know, 
on the one hand I was like I really don't need you to 



33 
Z. GOLDFARB 



tell me this right now. On the other hand, it's like, 
okay, so here we are at the doors to hell and you're 
going to tell me Kowalczyk is trapped there. What are 
we going to do about it? So he was like, let me take a 
couple of guys and we'll go back and dig him out. I 
said listen. If he's trapped under here, you're not 
going to dig him out with a couple guys. We need to 
get to the command post and get a team and go after 
him. I said are you okay? because he was coughing, and 
he was like I'm okay, I'm okay. I said okay. I said 
can you make your way to the command post? 

I have to tell you that I'm not sure what 
happened or where the command post was at this point. 
I didn't know -- see, this situation was like war in 
that, you know, you've heard the expression the five of 
war? Too much stuff happened sometimes too quickly for 
you to sort it all out and make logical decisions based 
on what's real, so you just sort of -- you don't have 
all the information. You try and make the best 
decisions with the information that you have, which is 
flawed, and you kind of go from there because you have 
no alternative. You don't have enough information and 
the information that you do have, including stuff that 
your own senses bring you, you can't process it. 



34 
Z. GOLDFARB 



So my thinking is the command post is still 
where we left it. I don't really know at this moment, 
this is like two minutes post-collapse or five minutes 
post-collapse, I don't know what's collapsed. In fact, 
I mean, it was clear that something made a big mess, 
but I don't know what it is or how bad it is. I was 
not able to get around to recon it. My first priority 
was to make sure my men were okay, my people were okay, 
which they were. My second priority, as I understood 
it, was to carry out my mission, which was to have a 
casualty collection point there, and so we were doing 
that. 

So when Mark presents with the idea that 
Chief Kowalczyk is lost, my direction to him was to go 
to the Fire command post, take another man with him, go 
to the Fire command post and get help for Chief 
Kowalczyk, lead them to where he is. So I gave him 
that direction. Fortunately, as we later found out, 
Chief Kowalczyk wasn't trapped at all. But, again, 
sometimes you don't have all the information. 

So I had Pinkus trying to get things 
organized and something is nagging at me. It's 
clearing up outside, it's clearing a little bit, you 
know, you start to see a little sun. I talked to 



35 
Z. GOLDFARB 



Mary. She was up on the corner helping them with some 
transports and some patients, some resources. 
Something tells me I want to find another exit out of 
this building. 

So someone was with me. I can't remember who 
it is at the moment. Someone was with me. I said 
let's go recon another way out of this building. Let's 
see if we can get out toward the water in case we have 
to retreat from where we are. So we go out through the 
back warrens or through the back lobby of 3 World 
Financial Center and we find like an exit corridor that 
leads us to an exit door which actually takes us out, I 
guess, right onto this promenade here. So that's 
pretty swift. The time sequence is just kind of 
jumbled. I'm not sure how -- the sequence that you 
gave me, what time did the south tower collapse? 

9:55. Okay. And the north tower collapsed 
at 10:20. 

Q. 10:20. 

A. Yes. So figure 9:55 that collapses, figure 
at 10:05, 10:10, something like that, we're in the 
lobby, we're looking for this exit pathway. In fact, 
my strong sense is that it was Stone with me again, 
like maybe he had reported to the command post, come 



36 
Z. GOLDFARB 



back, maybe we had found Kowalczyk by that point, 
something like that. I think Stone was back with me 
again, and I remember Chief Carrasquillo came through 
here and we gave him, because he was coughing and 
choking, we gave him some water. We were starting to 
get a few patients, not a lot. It wasn't like 100 
patients . 

There was a lot of trouble getting through to 
the command post on the radio. Previously there had 
been a couple of frequencies in use. When we got on 
the scene, we were on command. Then we were trying to 
use tact 2. I was using tact 2. When I set up Vesey 
and West, I had Pinkus go to tact 2. We were using 
tact 2 to communicate so it would be clear, and we do 
that, Mary and I do that all the time, so we know how 
that works. We routinely at events do that. So I was 
on tact 2 with Pinkus and she was on Citywide command 
talking to the MERV. 

At some point a decision was made, actually 
before I left the command post, to start switching this 
whole incident onto Manhattan south so it would have 
its own frequency and that was underway, and that was a 
great decision. In fact, that should be standardized. 
We should just do that. That was a great decision 



37 
Z. GOLDFARB 



because it gives us a complete clear from everything 
frequency to use. But anyway, that was underway. 

So here I am -- I know I'm jumping around a 
little bit, but I'm just trying to give you the pieces. 

Q. You're doing great. 

A. So I come out and I see there is this 
promenade over here, you know, it looks so beautiful 
down by the water, it's sunny and bright and clear, and 
I see some people over there and I see the ambulances 
over here and the street is just covered with stuff, 
and something tells me -- I call Pinkus on the radio 
and I said listen, get everybody together and get all 
the equipment, I said, and proceed -- I said I'm going 
to send someone back to show you the back way out. Use 
the back way out, get everybody out here, we're going 
to relocate on North End Avenue, the whole triage area. 

Q. That would be North End and Vesey? 

A. North End and Vesey. We're going to move to 
North End and Vesey. And you know, I can't tell you 
why I gave that order other than maybe it didn't feel 
safe being in that building. I don't know. I can't 
tell you why I gave that order. Something made me do 
that. So he acknowledges the order and I move down to 
North End and Vesey. 



38 
Z. GOLDFARB 



Here's the corner of North End and Vesey, and 
right here on the northeast corner I encounter Chief 
Gombo was there, Basile, Pascale, Kowalczyk, my aide, 
their aides, a bunch of people, and we were just trying 
to get a handle on whatever it was the hell happened 
because we're not sure. Pinkus is pulling these people 
out of here. They pull out and we take over the -- we 
move the treatment area into the lobby. . . 
(End of tape side A.) 

Q. ... interview with Chief Goldfarb. 

A. So we're on the corner. We moved the 
treatment area into the Embassy Suites Hotel. 

Q. Do you want to take a break or go on? 

A. You know, I've told this story 10,000 times, 
but to tell it with the level of detail that you want, 
you have to walk through it, and when you walk through 
it, sometimes you remember things you'd rather not 
remember. But I'll deal with it. 

Q. If you need a break, just let me know. 

A. Thank you. 

So what was interesting about the Embassy 
Suites is that, when you come in, there's a huge atrium 
area here, high, very high, lofty ceiling with glass, 
plexi, whatever. So we go in there and then off to the 



39 
Z. GOLDFARB 



North End of that lobby is a covered area. I remember 
seeing a covered area because the building was above. 
So we go in there and we have to be sure that we're 
clear of that atrium. So the team moves in there and 
they start setting up a treatment area in there, and 
we're out on the street. Now we're getting patients. 
Patients are coming in to us. 

Suddenly, my hero, my heroine, and I say that 
just out of total respect for her, says chief, the 
other building is coming down. I hear it. I'm like, 
Mary, try to stay calm. The other building is not 
coming down. Again, in retrospect, I mean, it's funny, 
you know, you just weren't processing this. Who could 
absolutely process the idea that a tower of the World 
Trade Center has collapsed and when you look you don't 
see it? Who could process that? 

I'll tell you that to this minute I have no 
idea, no concept whatsoever as to what the injury count 
or the impact on us, operationally, organizationally, 
peoplewise, was of just that discrete event of the one 
tower coming down. I know the total picture. I mean, 
I don't know if you have any idea what that is, but I 
have no idea. 

Q. No, I don't. 



40 
Z. GOLDFARB 



A. But I have no idea. I don't know who was 
trapped, I don't know who was lost. I mean, we lost 
eight EMS people. I don't know if they died in the 
first tower, the second tower or in the middle. I have 
no idea. I don't know if anybody knows that. 

Q. I don't believe that's known. 

A. But anyway, she's like no, chief, I hear it, 
and she said you know I have very keen hearing. And 
she does. She said you know I have very keen hearing. 
She said that building is coming down. So we -- and 
we're standing with a bunch chiefs --we say all right, 
you know what? Let's just move into cover. So we 
clear everybody off the street, we get everybody in 
under the sheltered area of this hotel inside, and you 
can't believe it. The second tower comes down. This 
was just a day of such mind-boggling stuff. 

So the second tower comes down. Huge clouds, 
huge -- the same thing. It's like, hey, I've been here 
already, you know? Just horrible. The strangest thing 
is I don't remember noise associated with it. You 
would think that would be a very noisy kind of thing, 
and I just remember quiet. I don't know if like your 
ears disconnect or something? I don't know. I don't 
remember ground shaking, noise, any of that stuff, and 



41 
Z. GOLDFARB 



I was right there. Much too close. 

So this conies down and now we have a much 
larger area of debris outside and the cloud and stuff 
everywhere, and we're in the lobby and we're treating 
patients. I'm not treating patients, but the teams are 
in the lobby treating patient and now we're getting 
more patients. We had moved around a table in the 
lobby, the chiefs, to try and plan a little strategy 
here and it was just too chaotic, so we decided we're 
going to pull back. We go into like a back corridor 
here at this Embassy Suites Hotel, and it's Gombo, 
Terranova, myself, Kowalczyk, Basile, Pascale, and 
we're just trying to have a little bit of a strategy 
session, and I think all of us are like just kind of 
blown away by what was going on. 

But we had a very rational brainstorming 
session where we reassessed, number one, we were under 
attack. Number two, we've probably taken a huge impact 
on this. Number three, we're not winning. There's no 
success in our staying here. We don't know what's 
going to collapse next, blow up next, get bombarded 
next, the next thing coming, whatever. We don't know 
if we got nuked. We just didn't know what was going 
on. So we acknowledged that we were shy a lot of 



42 
Z. GOLDFARB 



information and we decided to take three strategic 
decisions, all of which I think are important. 

Number one was we knew that there were other 
resources on the scene and okay and working because we 
could hear some of it on the radio, but we weren't able 
to get through. We were having a lot of radio 
trouble. We couldn't get through on the cell phones. 
We were just having a lot of trouble getting through. 
So we knew there were players on the scene doing stuff 
on the scene. We decided that our best immediate 
strategy was to pull back clear of the scene, try and 
regroup, not bring more resources into the scene 
because we didn't even know how big the scene was at 
this point. We didn't have a definition of where the 
scene began and ended. 

So we decided to set up two mobilization 
points, one north and one south, direct any further 
response into those points, and try and pull back 
whatever forces we could to those points so we could 
regroup them, and basically we decided to leave the 
scene in the hands of the people who were there while 
we tried to get a little better picture. We were also 
mindful of the fact that we didn't know what else was 
going on in the city, we didn't know what else might 



43 
Z. GOLDFARB 



get hit in the city, another target or something. We 
knew we were under attack of some kind by somebody, but 
we didn't know the status of any of our operating 
forces. We didn't know the status, we had no picture. 
We just -- again, no information. 

So we decided to activate these two 
mobilization points. We chose Chelsea Piers on 23rd 
and West, which was my choice because I knew it was a 
big spot, big open space, that there's plenty of room 
in there to set up casualty collection, staging, really 
anything you want, it's huge and sort of right there. 
It's a little further away maybe than you would like 
it, but then again, that's not necessarily a bad thing, 
it wasn't far. The second place we chose was the ferry 
terminal, the Staten Island ferry terminal on the 
Brooklyn side -- no. The Staten Island ferry terminal 
on the a Manhattan side. 

So we tried to get through. There were a 
couple times I was able to break through to Citywide 
dispatcher, and we tried to get that information to him 
that we were setting up those two points. We tried to 
see if there was an unaffiliated chief or someone who 
hadn't been committed to this thing already that we 
could send to each of those places to set those up. I 



44 
Z. GOLDFARB 



don't think we were successful in doing that. 

So Walter Kowalczyk and Frank Pascale went 
north to Chelsea Piers. I'm not sure who we sent to 
the ferry terminal. I don't think we were able to send 
anybody from there to the ferry terminal. I can't 
remember at the moment what the task was Pete 
Carrasquillo and Chief Gombo and myself were going to 
go to -- we decided we had to go to -- it was clear 
that we had to get a citywide command center up because 
we had a citywide problem. It was also clear that 7 
World Trade Center, which was the OEM command post, was 
not going to be accessible. 

So Chief Gombo suggested Police Plaza is the 
place to go, and he was actually on target, a totally 
right suggestion. So we decided that Gombo and myself 
would go to Police Plaza to set up the big picture and 
Kowalczyk and Pascale would go to Chelsea Piers and 
work the scene picture and the evacuation piece of it 
and we would try and get someone over to the ferry 
terminal, and that was our strategy. 

So we broke up from that. I think Basile 
might have just stayed there on the scene working the 
scene. I can't remember what it was that he was 
supposed to do. So we broke from that and -- I'm 



45 
Z. GOLDFARB 



sorry. I said Basile but I think I mean Pasquale. 

Q. I believe Basile went over to the ferry 
terminal? 

A. All right. So we leave there. As we're 
coming out of our little brainstorming session, the 
lobby is now full of patients, lots of patients, some 
of them our own people, our people helping other 
people, a couple of ESU cops came running into the 
lobby and they start shouting everybody out, we've got 
to evacuate the building, we've got a major gas leak in 
the building, everybody out of the building right now, 
right now, everybody go. And you're like what else? 
Are we going to get like frogs also? What else is 
going to happen here? So we start helping get people 
out of the lobby and, you know, it starts to get 
spooky, like you think, gee, is this building going to 
blow up as I'm trying to leave it or something? It 
became very strange. 

We get out to the street. I can't find 
Mary. I'm calling on the radio. She's not answering. 
She was two blocks up helping another ambulance. But 
we finally hook up. So Gombo and Terranova and myself, 
when we catch up with Mary, start proceeding north on 
North End Avenue to get out of there. Like how are we 



46 
Z. GOLDFARB 



going to get to Police Plaza? Well, we're going to 
walk. There's no other way to get there. This stretch 
here, this North End Avenue, this is like a wasteland. 
I mean, not normally, but it was like a wasteland. 
Everything was covered, vehicles skewed every which 
way, injured people, people helping other people, rigs 
that won't start, and I felt like a refugee fleeing 
some war-torn country. 

As I thought about it later, it was the first 
time in my life that I ever felt that an incident beat 
us. You know, we go into an incident to control it. 
That's what we do. If you're a control freak, that 
works for you even better. You go into a scene, you 
take command, you assess whatever the problem is and 
you manage the incident. That's what we train, that's 
what we do, and here we are going into an incident that 
is beating the shit out of us and has actually pushed 
us back and chased us away and we're leaving behind our 
wounded, we were leaving behind who knows what, we're 
leaving equipment, we're abandoning equipment. We took 
all the people that were with us, but we were 
abandoning the equipment, some of the equipment, and we 
were just trudging out through the dust like just a 
defeated army. That's how I felt. It just felt 



47 
Z. GOLDFARB 



terrible. It just felt terrible. 

We get up to like Murray Street and we look 
back and where there used to be those two beautiful 
towers -- and I'm a New York born my whole life. I 
mean, I watched those things go up. I always lived 
with those there, you know? Where there used to be 
those two beautiful tours, and all you see is the 
sunshine and a huge cloud, a huge cloud, and I said to 
Mary, turn and look at that because you'll never want 
to forget that. She just looks at me with these eyes 
and she was (inaudible). I will never forget that. 

She told me later how she was watching those 
people falling out the building, which makes me think, 
I read this thing in the Times a few days later about a 
class that was evacuating from one of the schools and 
how one of the students turned to a teacher and said 
look, teacher, the buildings are on fire. 

So we proceed up North End Avenue, met up 
with some crews with some patients and we're just all 
kind of walking in this direction, and we turn back and 
there's huge clouds of smoke and dust and everything 
and we had stuff, our masks on, I popped my hood out, 
covered my face. We had surgical masks, stuff like 
that, just to keep all of the stuff out. It was so 



48 
Z. GOLDFARB 



surreal. 

We go up I guess to Chambers. We walk up to 
Chambers Street and then over Chambers by the school 
and then we start walking north on West Street and we 
still have -- Mary still has these two guys in tow that 
have been with us all along, Darnowski, and Darnowski 
is convinced that his wife is dead. In fact, at one 
point Darnowski and Mary were standing there watching 
these people falling out the building and a woman jumps 
and whatever she was wearing, maybe all white, and he 
turns to Mary and just like blank and said my wife is 
dressed in those clothes today. So Darnowski is just 
in shock. He's just catatonic. He was just tagging 
along with us, he and this other guy. When we get to 
West Street, I tell Mary we've got to leave Darnowski 
with somebody else because we have another mission, 
find somebody that will take care of him and we need to 
move on . 

Some of this decision making really feels 
like combat decision making, and I don't have war 
fighting experience, but a lot of these were like 
decisions you make in combat, you know, cut off the 
foot to save the life, stuff like that, leave this 
behind, abandon equipment. It was just stuff that we 



49 
Z. GOLDFARB 



don't do and train for. It's just unusual decision 
making . 

Our plan is we're going to go north on West 
Street to like North Murray -- is it North Murray 
Street? I think it was North Street and try and work 
our way around and get to Police Plaza. So we're 
walking and all of a sudden I notice Mary is not beside 
me and I look and she's like 40 steps back and she's 
like hang on, chief, and somehow, I don't know where 
she conjures this stuff up, but a good aide does this 
kind of thing and she is absolutely the best. But she 
find a cop an a golf cart in the midst of all this 
insanity and tells the cop you need to take the chiefs 
to Police Plaza right now, and this cop just sort of 
says okay and all of a sudden pulls up next to us, 
there's Mary with a golf cart saying everybody pile 
on . 

So Gombo and Terranova and myself, Mary, got 
onto this golf cart and this cop takes off, and there 
we are driving a golf cart with dust swirling around us 
and everybody just kind of -- there was not enough 
seats for all of these people, so everybody was just 
kind of holding on for dear life and this guy just 
drives us through the streets. I will never forget. 



50 
Z. GOLDFARB 



Everything was covered with this schmutz, ash, dust, 
and everybody is in shock, just all of the people, 
everybody was just freaking aghast. I swear to God, 
this was the most unbelievable experience. I can tell 
you what time that was. This was right around 11:15. 
So when did that second tower come down? 10:30 the 
second tower came down? So the time fits very nicely. 
So right around 11:15 we finally pull up at 
Police Plaza, give or take, I'd say give or take 15 
minutes, we pull up at Police Plaza, and as we -- the 
guy drives us right to the front door and with cops all 
over apparently there were M-16s out, I mean, MP-5s. 
They were ready for war over there. We just pulled 
right to the door, get off, brush our stuff off, you 
know, and walk in. As we get off the golf cart, Jerry 
Gombo said something that I will remember forever 
because it showed really true leadership on his part. 
He turned to us all and said, okay, first order of 
business, find phones and call your families and let 
them know you're okay, and that was just -- you know, 
Jerry spends a lot of time inside and I think he did a 
good job under fire. So I think he earned some respect 
on the part of some people. 

Q. It says a lot about the man. 



51 
Z. GOLDFARB 



A. So we go upstairs trailing our cloud of dust 
like Linus in the Snoopy cartoon and we get there and 
Police Plaza is busy and -- well, how far do you want 
to take the story? 

Q. Roughly noon, somewhere around then. 

A. We walk in. We were the first Fire or EMS 
representation there. We were probably among the first 
people to actually come in from the scene covered with 
dust and everybody was looking at us like, oh, my God. 
They were watching on monitors and stuff. It used to 
be the old OEM command center. That's now the police 
operations command center. 

So we report in, tell them we're here, they 
make some space for us, then we all get to the phones 
and call significant people, let them know at least 
we're alive, and then we set about big picture 
coordination, and what we did for the next eight hours 
was large-scale disaster stuff. A lot of it centered 
around ordering federal resources, USAR teams, EMAT 
teams, planning how we were going to deploy them. We 
planned to set out three casualty collection points. 
All the strategy came from us when we were in that 
command center. We planned to set up three casualty 
collection points one at Javitz Center, one in the 



52 
Z. GOLDFARB 



Brooklyn Navy Yard, one in the Staten Island ferry 
terminal, at the Yankee Stadium, at the new Staten 
Island Yankee Stadium, and we pulled down some extra 
resources for the casualty collection points, not using 
EMS assets because we didn't have any. 

We had a tremendous problem communicating. 
The phones there weren't working. They were 
intermittent. The cells weren't working. The radios 
weren't working. Very, very hard communicating out 
from there. There were some resources that were up, 
but we didn't know about them, like Verizon phones and 
stuff like that, not Verizon, Nextel phones, but we 
didn't have a Nextel phone. So we just really had a 
lot of challenge in terms of getting that up and 
running, but here you have a huge disaster, an 
improvised command center and a lot of infrastructure 
stuff like phone lines and switching stations damaged. 
It was probably surprising that we could accomplish 
what we did. 

We set up a separate emergency operational 
center for ESFA, Emergency Support Function Aid, which 
is from the federal response plan, health and medical 
assets, I'm pretty well versed in all this stuff and 
I've been doing this kind of planning, you know me, 



53 
Z. GOLDFARB 



I've been doing this kind of planning for 20 years, so 
I knew what needed to be done. Bill Connelly was 
there, the State Health Department's regional disaster 
planning guy, and I knew him personally, and when he 
showed up, I told him exactly what I wanted him to do. 
We got space from PD and set up the ESFA operations 
center. We briefed them on the information that we had 
and on what we anticipated, which at that point, early 
in the day, was thousands of patients, and we made out 
a concept of operations for them and told him what kind 
of resources we were looking for, helped them get 
organized. We got reps in from Health and Hospitals, 
Greater New York Hospital Association, Nassau, Suffolk 
Hospital Council, Nassau Health Department, City Health 
Department. We tried to get Nassau Health Department. 
I don't know if they came. City Health Department, 
State Health Department, later on in the day a FEMA rep 
joined us and started planning for deploying EMAT 
teams . 

So we got all of this up and running. We 
coordinated a zillion bizarre requests, and I have a 
log that goes from 1130 until when we stopped writing 
about 1900, just things that were going on. I see my 
first entry at 1130. New Jersey had sent Bob Resitar 



54 
Z. GOLDFARB 



from the University Hospital, he's one of their 
assistant directors over at University Hospital System, 
they had sent him, in fact, they were there before us, 
and Frank Goodstein from the New Jersey mutual aid, and 
they were there before us. So they greeted us and I 
have a log entry at 1130 and they tell me they had 
4,000 patients between Ellis Island and the Hoboken 
PATH station and various shore points on New Jersey 
that all these people were coming over by boat and 
landing . 

So here we are coordinating mutual aid and we 
told them don't send us any mutual aid from Jersey. 
You guys work your thousands of patients and we'll get 
the mutual aid elsewhere because obviously you're 
stretched. I'm not sure what they ultimately ended up 
with. I think that number crunched to like 2,000 or 
1,500. But it's still huge numbers. 

The SEMA rep was there. The State Department 
of Health rep was there. We told the SEMA rep we 
wanted to activate the regional mutual aid plan, and we 
ordered five task forces of ten ambulances and an 
officer at each point from the east, Nassau and 
Suffolk, and one from the north, Westchester and points 
north, and we had a plan for this. I mean, I don't 



55 
Z. GOLDFARB 



know how many people really knew that this plan 
existed, but I knew the plan existed because I was 
working on the task force. Gombo didn't know it 
existed . 

So we ordered that would have been 100 
ambulances, 50 into a staging area on Randalls Island, 
50 to a staging area at Shea Stadium. Again, we 
weren't sure what we were doing with them. We didn't 
want to commit anything more to the city until I had a 
sense of what was going on and you really couldn't get 
any good (inaudible) at the scene. We didn't really 
know what was going on there. So we figured, okay, 
let's order 100 trucks, at least that will give us a 
jump and we'll see what we need to do from there. So 
we were able to communicate to the point where we had 
highway patrol and an EMS supervisor at each of those 
sites waiting to catch this mobilization as it came 
in. Then we started fielding buffers and supplies, 
shipments of stuff coming in. So my decision was to 
send all that stuff to Randalls Island where I figured 
it could at least be secured, checked and secured with 
some accountability before it gets deployed someplace. 
We spent basically the next eight hours running the 
command center, fielding decisions. At the outset we 



56 
Z. GOLDFARB 



were doing the Fire side of it, too, because we were 
the only reps there, and then a couple of chiefs 
arrived in a little bit of time. Tom Galvin got there 
and Ed Kilduff from the Fire end of it. 

What's funny is that a few months ago Tom 
Galvin and I were in a course together on weapons of 
mass destruction, incident management, and during one 
of the breaks in the course he and I were having a 
conversation about the World Trade Center bombing 
because in the course, among the course material was 
the FEMA U.S. Fire Administration report on the first 
World Trade Center bombing, which included a section 
written by Steve Kerr and myself. So we were talking 
about that in class, that I had written that. 

So Galvin and I were talking about it and now 
it's after the merger and how would we respond, and I 
told him that, for reasons I won't go into now, that 
the response would be very different if we had to 
relive this thing, different not necessarily in a 
positive way. So here we are four weeks later and we 
were actually living it. It was just sort of one of 
those strange ironies in the world, and the Fire guys, 
I mean, there were Fire deputy chiefs, but they weren't 
emergency management experts, they weren't prepared to 



57 
Z. GOLDFARB 



really look at the big picture emergency management 
issues, so we were helping with that as well. 

We stayed there and -- mind you, we had been 
out since 10:00 o'clock the night before. So we were 
with that until about --my log logs off -- I mean, you 
can see how may handwriting deteriorates. I guess I 
was getting tired. My log logs off at 1900, and we 
went to try and find a place to sleep. I remember 
that. So we couldn't find a place to sleep. We ended 
up taking some blankets and laying out on -- there was 
a little strip of grass like two feet wide alongside 
the stairs that went up to St. Andrew's Plaza. So we 
laid these blankets out and then we just laid down. We 
didn't know if we were going to go to sleep. Every 
noise I would just like jump. It was so weird. It was 
so weird. 

So after about an hour of tossing and 
turning, Jerry and Ross come by and they said that we 
were relieved upstairs by Captain Connelly and that we 
could go. They said they were going back to the 
scene. So we said, oh, okay. So we went upstairs to 
get our personal equipment and come back down. So we 
set off for the scene Mary, myself, this guy Bob 
Resitar from University Hospital, and along the way we 



58 
Z. GOLDFARB 



pick up nine or ten off-duty members who were on their 
way in to the scene to be of help. 

So we take this little procession and march 
up to Chambers and West and do what we can at the 
command post at the back of the Suburban, and Chief 
McCracken and Chief Kowalczyk and a bunch of other 
people were trying to get a handle on things and we 
ended up -- we tried to sort out the leadership 
manpower so that some people could go home and be fresh 
in the morning. So then we decided, Kowalczyk and 
myself decided we would stay the overnight shift. So 
at 6:00 a.m., I think, while some people went back and 
got some sleep so that we could get a fresh relief in 
in the morning and then start another 12-hour cycle. 
So we stayed there. 

During the course of the night we got in two 
field communications trucks from New Jersey, our mutual 
aid brought them in and set them up, so we had like a 
real working command center because we don't have any 
assets like that for EMS operations. So we got those 
trucks from Jersey and we put the full ICS structure 
into place with a planning section, logistics section 
and a coroner operations section, a finance 
administration section that was contemplating how we 



59 
Z. GOLDFARB 



were going to structure that. So we developed an 
incident action plan for the morning, which I actually 
have a copy of here somewhere. (inaudible) an incident 
action plan so that they could get started in the 
morning . 

Do you want me go on? 

Q. Just go on until you feel you don't want to 
go any further. 

A. I guess the story is close to the end of this 
day. 

Q. Okay. 

A. So we work through until like -- I'll just 
keep going. So we work until about 6:00 in the 
morning. This is now Wednesday morning. We started 
relieving. So now we get relieved at 6:00 or at 7:00, 
we get something to eat, and we decide we're going to 
go find our car. So we get a Gator. Whoever ordered 
the Gators, that was just an absolutely wonderful 
decision. I mean, those were so needed there and it 
was just the perfect tool for this job and still is to 
this minute. So we catch a ride on a Gator and we ride 
over to south of where we had parked the car, as close 
as we could come, and then we continued on foot through 
this just unbelievable devastation, and when you go on 



60 
Z. GOLDFARB 



foot, you couldn't even recognize the street to know 
which block face it was. I was like a block north of 
where we were and Mary was like, no, chief, we weren't 
that far north, and I'm like, yeah, I think we were. 
But we weren't. She was right. 

So we're finally just kind of peering around 
the rubble pile and we see the car, and the only way we 
recognized it was that it looked like it had some 
molten light bar on the top, not that it was 
recognizable as a light bar, just a little heap of 
molten something that maybe, you know, you could say 
that once was a light bar. We look inside and actually 
the car is not crushed or anything, it's just burnt. 
The only thing that was left in that car that was 
recognizable at all was the metal piece of a 
stethoscope and some melted chips from my Palm Pilot 
and that was it. 

We lost, aside from the vehicle, which had 93 
miles on it when we pulled up at the Trade Center, we 
lost the vehicle, we lost thousands and thousands of 
dollars worth of Department equipment. Mary lost her 
pocketbook, all her personal effects and her license 
and ID and badge and everything a person carries in 
their pocketbook. Of course, when you work like we 



61 
Z. GOLDFARB 



work, your car is like your locker and everything is in 
it, and we certainly had everything in that car and it 
was all gone. Laptop computer, my Palm Pilot, 
everything, personal clothes, everything. So we 
brushed ourselves off. Our ride had left us. It was 
like what else is going to happen? 

So we walk over to the Staten Island ferry 
terminal figuring we'd catch a ride from there, and we 
catch a ride from there on a supply truck that was 
dropping off supplies. He gives us a ride to Maspeth, 
and I was hoping to get back our old car, the '95 car, 
which we had just turned in the day before to get the 
new car, but they had already given that out to someone 
else. So they give us an old Suburban, which was 
fine. So now it's like 10:30 in the morning on 
Wednesday. Drive home. We were due back there on 
Thursday morning. We were the 6:00 a.m. relief on 
Thursday morning. 

So you'd think you would be able to go to 
sleep after this, right? A long long time before 
sleep. I guess that's the end of the story. 

Q. Is there anything else you'd like to add? 

A. I think a lot of people did an incredible job 
that day and in the days since. I think that this 



62 
Z. GOLDFARB 



isn't over. I think that the people that are looking 
at this event as, you know, horrible tragedy, World 
Trade Center, kind of like it was an earthquake or a 
hurricane or something and now we're recovering and 
we're having concerts and we're burying our dead and 
we're trying to pick up the pieces, number one, are 
forgetting that we're at war, and I think that this was 
only act one, and I think that we're dealing with a 
very evil adversary who has a completely different 
value set than ours. I think there will be more acts 
of war like this. I hope they're not in my town. But 
I think that, if we fail to prepare for them, we're 
foolish and naive, and I think that we've got a lot of 
work in front of us. 

I think there's a tremendous amount of 
resources in this organization to be applied to that 
stuff if it's used appropriately. I think there are a 
lot of good lessons to be learned from this that we 
should try and learn. I think we did a lot of things 
right and I think there were a lot of other things that 
we could do better or opportunities for improvement, as 
they say. I think we'd better fasten our seat belts 
because I don't think this is over. No thinking person 
could think that this is over. 



63 
Z. GOLDFARB 



The other thing is that we keep talking about 
the losses on this job from an EMS standpoint and we 
say there were two, Carlos Lillo and Ricardo Quinn. 
There were six other EMS professionals that died in 
this incident on our mission, and it's not their fault 
or anybody else's fault how we let this EMS system, it 
would be a hodgepodge of voluntary hospitals and 
voluntary ambulances and commercial ambulances. But 
you know what? They all came in to do our mission and 
I think that they need to be recognized as such and I 
think it ' s a disgrace to us that we're not counting the 
names of these six dead people who were just as heroic 
and just as dead as Quinn and Lillo on the same 
mission. I think that's a real shame. That really 
bothers me. It really bothers me. End of report. 

MR. ECCLESTON: This interview is concluded 
at 42 minutes past 12:00 on October 24th. Thank you 
very much, chief, for conducting this interview. 



File No. 9110146 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

EMT IMMACULADA GAT T AS 

Interview Date: October 17, 2001 



Transcribed by Elisabeth F. Nason 



I . GAT T AS 

MS. BASTEDENBECK: Today is October 17, 
2001. The time is 1229 hours. My name is 
Christine Bastedenbeck . I work for the New York 
City Fire Department on the World Trade Center 
Task Force. I'm at Division 6 to conduct an 
interview with the following individual. 
Q. Please state your name, rank and assignment? 
A. EMT-D Immaculada Gattas, shield number 1443. 
Q. Your assigned -- 
A. Assigned to Division 6. 

Q. Today we would just like you to recount the 
events to the best of your ability on September 11, 
2001. 

A. Okay. That day started with a beautiful day 
and we were just talking about that, how beautiful, 
sunny and warm it was, until someone from next door 
from the Division came running toward us, told us to 
turn on the TV. We turned on the TV and we started 
watching the news, saying that an airplane had just 
crashed against one of the World Trade Center towers. 
We were like oh, my god, what a horrific accident and 
we were just watching on and off until we found out 
there was another one on its way and it crashed against 
the second -- it crashed against the second tower. 



I . GAT T AS 

That's when the Chief, Chief Pascale, told us 
to stand by, because we couldn't just rush into the 
scene. We needed to be requested first. So then she 
was called in, she told us to get our gear and radios 
and stuff and just get ready and go on to the vehicle. 
That's exactly what we did. 

It took us a few, 15, 20 minutes to get 
downtown. We took the West Side Highway. It was 
packed with cars and a lot of roads were blocked by 
NYPD and maybe that's what saved our lives, because we 
were supposed -- we were riding with Chief Pascale. It 
was, in fact, Chief Pascale, Lieutenant Michael Cahill, 
Steve Pilla, which is a paramedic, ALS coordinator, 
Neil Sweeting, ALS coordinator and myself. I'm an 
emergency medical technician. 

We were supposed to go with Chief Pascale to 
the command center, but because we were stuck in 
traffic, we got there a little bit later than we were 
supposed to be, and as soon as we start parking we 
start seeing people running our way and we were about 
-- we were very close to West and Vesey and we saw 
people running and running and telling us to get out of 
the way, that -- to run for our lives. We were like -- 
we would try to drive away from that area until we 



I . GAT T AS 

could no more. It was close to 20 feet, those 20 feet, 
then we just parked and hid until everything subsided. 

Q. Where did you hide? 

A. I guess buildings and vehicles and stuff like 
that. 

Q. You got out of the car and you just ran? 

A. Yes. We just ran. 

Q. You got separated? 

A. No, not at this time. We were not running 
together, but we were running toward the same area and 
at the end we just managed to find each other. We went 
around the corner where we were, I'm not sure exactly 
where that was, we were running along Vesey Street 
after the first building collapsed. I think that it 
was West Street heading south from West Street. That's 
where we finally -- we got together, Chief Pascale, 
other staff members, and then we went out inside one of 
the buildings . 

Q. Do you know which building that was? 

A. No, I don't know the name of that building, 
but we were doing patient care there. I was also doing 
patient tracking, just writing down their names, where 
the patients were taken, writing down the name of the 
unit numbers, and they were coming from private 



I . GAT T AS 

ambulances or EMS ambulances or municipal ambulances, 
you know, stuff like that, so I was tracking all that 
information, and I remember going inside this building 
again and as I was tracking this patient information, 
they told us run away, you have to evacuate 
immediately, because the second building is going to 
collapse . 

We were like oh, my god, it can't be 
possible. Patients were already hooked into their 
oxygen lines and their masks. They were strapped into 
long boards and all that kind of stuff and there was 
too many of them, so we had to unstrap them, removed 
their face masks and just assist them as good as we 
could, because there was too many for us. We are doing 
this or just let them die there. Believe me they run. 
As soon as we let them go they just disappeared, as we 
did. We started running and running and running and I 
just remember, I think Lieutenant Cahill running next 
to me. He was just -- it just -- we were just running 
as fast as we could and I remember one second or moment 
looking back and seeing the cloud. 

First listening to this sound, this 
thundering sound and then silence after that, like 
eerie silence, until the cloud caught up to us and 



I . GAT T AS 

surrounded us and you could see no more. Then it was 
silence and it was thousands and thousands of millions 
of particles hitting our skin. It felt like something 
was hitting my skin like glass and I couldn't see 
anything, nothing. 

I remember feeling a sharp pain on my left 
arm, but I didn't see blood or anything like that. I 
just kept running. Could hardly see, you could hardly 
breathe. I put my face inside my shirt. I had my 
helmet on. I didn't have any protective breathing 
devices on. I didn't have my turnout coat with me at 
that time. I only had my helmet, so I pulled the 
shield, the eye shield down to protect my eyes a little 
bit, but not that much, and covered my face with my 
shirt and just kept running and the only thing I was 
able to listen was to my breathing. I mean it was 
-- oh, my god, it was such a weird feeling. It was 
just like hu, hu, hu . Slow motion like in a tunnel. 
You are just running, running, running, followed by 
firefighters and EMTs and police officers and members 
of the media. 

I saw this member of the media falling on the 
ground, picking up his equipment, running again, 
crashing against the fence. All of us running at like, 



I . GAT T AS 

I don't know, like a stampede of animals and just 
looking behind and running and running until we could 
see no more. Suddenly this crowd of people split. One 
went to the right and one went to the left. I went 
towards the left. I followed this group of people. I 
couldn't see where I was running or where I was going. 
I just followed this group of people until I saw an 
opening . 

I didn't know where I was getting, where I 
was going, but I saw this opening, and I said these 
people are going inside that place, that's where I'm 
going. We all went inside. We squeezed inside this 
area, big guys, short people. I mean it was 
incredible, and as soon as everybody got in we closed 
the door. Total darkness, everybody, some people were 
crying, some people were coughing, some people were 
just completely -- in complete silence. It was like 
the end of the world, my god. 

At that second when I was running I just 
couldn't think of anything. Just running, something in 
my mind -- my brain was saying run, run, run or you are 
going to die. This building is going to fall on you. 
I didn't have any idea of how far or how fast I run, I 
knew I had run. 



I . GAT T AS 

I went inside this building or this thing 
that happened to be a construction trailer. After our 
eyes got adjusted, adapted to the darkness, that's when 
we were able to see each other and we start -- people 
from the construction trailer handed out paper towels 
with water and we used it to clean other peoples ' arms 
and faces and noses and it was spitting out dust and 
that's all we were doing for a long, long time. We 
were just spitting out and this lady said oh, my back 
was hurting and we just helped her sit on the floor 
against the wall. 

Just for a while, I don't know for how long, 
we stayed in that trailer in darkness, until one of us 
said okay, let's open the door. We have to open the 
door. We were scared to death to open the door. We 
didn't know what we were going to find. So we opened 
the door and we saw this oh, my god, everything covered 
by dust. Everything, a cloud, everything was 
surrounded by dust. People walking like zombies, 
covered in dust. Just like we were, but walking like 
zombies . 

We tried to pull some of them inside, cleaned 
them, and we helped them as best we could until it was 
safe for us, for everybody to go out again. It's like 



I . GAT T AS 

this trailer, this is where I managed to go inside the 
trailer with one of my Lieutenants, Lieutenant Cahill, 
and after he got out and I got out, we got separated 
again. I think we met one more time, because we were 
just walking in circles, met again and another place 
where someone, another EMT helped me irrigate my eyes, 
because I had contact lenses, so you imagine me running 
in this cloud of dust and who knows what, couldn't 
hardly see, hardly breathe, hardly do anything, just 
run for your life. 

So this guy held me. I took off my contact 
lenses, irrigate them, put them back, check my arm, 
which was okay, and then just go back again until 
someone said that we had to run again because there was 
going to be a manhole explosion. We had to run again. 

Without thinking of anything -- really my 
only thought was during the -- before the second 
collapse, after they said the building was tilting, 
just take care of the patients, get them out of the 
building so they could run at least and save their 
lives. I see some of them just run because everybody 
got separated, all the members of the Division got 
separated. The patients disappeared in the darkness. 
We disappeared in the darkness. 



10 
I . GAT T AS 



After they told about the manhole explosion, 
then everybody got separated, and I went a separate 
way, I don't know, I was completely disoriented. I 
encountered patients or people just running scared to 
death, people that were disoriented as I was, trying to 
find a way out of that area. 

I kept on walking, running and walking, and 
running and walking, until someone saw me and picked me 
up. It was an ambulance that was picking up emergency 
personnel. They were picking up paramedics and EMTs 
and police officers and firefighters. They took us to 
the -- drop us at the bus terminal, somewhere on the 
West Side Highway. 

From there, we were taken to the Chelsea 
Piers. EMS people were taken to the Chelsea Piers 
because they didn't want to us stay in that area. It 
was too unsafe for us. We were told that at Chelsea 
Piers were going to be used as hospital -- different 
sections were divided. One was getting ready as an 
operating room, the other one as a critical area, the 
other one like for first aid and stuff like that. 

We started getting busses with hundreds of 
doctors and hundreds of nurses and members of the 
clergy from different denominations and medical 



11 

I . GAT T AS 



equipment and all these areas were completely staffed 
and completely ready for what we were expecting we were 
going to get, which was patients, which we never got. 
We got approximately 150 patients, but this 
was after 7 o'clock p.m., 7 p.m., but before that we 
were expecting hundreds and hundreds, which never 
showed up, because almost nobody made it out of that 
collapse of the buildings, which was so horrific, 
because you go there thinking you are going to be able 
to help, thinking you are going to be able to, you 
know, assist someone, and after the first collapse we 
were able to help people, we were able at least, you 
know, people that had chest pains, had difficulty 
breathing and broken bones and things like that. We 
were able to help them, but after the second collapse, 
the only ones that survived were the ones that were 
able to run, and the ones that were able to run that 
made it out of there were disoriented and went back. I 
got disoriented. I didn't -- no idea, the slightest 
idea where I was, which was very scary. You couldn't 
see. You didn't know where you were, you didn't know 
if you were heading back because at the end you were 
just kind of walking in circles. I guess God was with 
me and I made it out of there and had to, you know, 



12 
I . GAT T AS 



deal with frustration and guilt because I had to go 
through that because you are trained to save lives, not 
to just witness a horrific destruction and no bodies 
found, nothing found, just dust. Just dust. 

That dust, I'm telling you Christine, it was 
so freaking itchy. I was itching for hours and hours 
and hours. It was like glass stuck in my skin. I went 
-- I don't know how many times I went to the bathroom 
to wash. It was like, like I had to get this thing out 
of my body and I cleaned my nose and my face and my 
arms and that thing, that dust, that stuff and when I 
went home, I took two baths and I still couldn't get 
that stuff out of my skin and I was coughing and 
spitting up stuff for days after that. 

When we went to the Chelsea Piers, we just 
got ready and we were like working at a frantic pace, 
just trying to get (inaudible) and equipment and oxygen 
tanks and face masks and non-rebreathers and all this 
stuff to set the tables, because we had tons of tables 
lined up with all the basic equipment in the critical 
area and the other one, the operating room had lights 
and surgeons and everything. We had pediatricians and 
surgeons and we had-- anyhow, it was incredible, and 
also we had in the ice ring, we had an area that was 



13 
I . GAT T AS 



already set up as a temporary morgue, thinking that we 
were going to be able to locate bodies and send them at 
least to the Chelsea Piers. 

So everything was actually set up and ready, 
so as time passed, we became so -- oh, my goodness, so 
upset and so frustrated because we were not getting 
anybody and the doctors that were there were more and 
more worried and upset and wanted to go to the Ground 
Zero area. They wanted to help and I think some of 
them managed to get authorization from EMS command to 
go to the Ground Zero area. That's what -- a group of 
them went with equipment. 

I stayed there until probably not that late, 
until probably 7, 7:30 after that. The Chief told us 
that we had to go because we had to come back early the 
following day. And we left. 

Q. Anything else you want to add to the events 
that happened prior to 11 o'clock in the morning? 

A. 11 o'clock. I just couldn't believe when I 
saw the first -- I heard about the airplane crash and I 
said oh, my god, what a stupid mistake this pilot made, 
how could he miss the tower. After the second one I 
knew it was terrorism. I knew. My husband, he works 
at One Police Plaza and he called me and he said I'm on 



14 
I . GAT T AS 



my way. Did you hear about the news. I said yes I 
heard it. I said I'm on my way to work. That was the 
last that I heard of him until I was able to call him 
again earlier after 2 or 3 p.m. that afternoon. He was 
also stuck underground for a couple of hours and so I 
was worried about him. He was worried about me. My 
son was in school and he was very worried about us. 

Q. How old is your son? 

A. He is 12. He was very worried. I just still 
today -- I can't believe this, I can't believe this 
happened, but I think that we as a team proved. We got 
together, we got closer, we were afraid, but we were 
not afraid. We never thought about dying, we only 
thought about helping other people. Just got really 
frustrated because we were unable to do that. We tried 
to do our best. We just couldn't do much. We just, 
you know, it was horrific and I can't -- I know I said 
this many times, and I cried a lot since then. 

I cried with my husband, I cried with my 



When I saw -- after I got home and I saw those pictures 
and I saw the people falling, oh, my god, that was when 



15 



I . GAT T AS 



I realized how bad it got. 

I was there, but I really didn't realize what 
was going on, but after the second collapse I didn't 
really knew how close we were, but after we saw the map 
and we realized that we were just a block away, we were 
around the corner and that we were supposed to be there 
and just fate kept us away. Just fate that we are here 
telling our stories because God was looking after us 
and I still remember this and I know I will never 
forget that day. 

I don't know what else to say. I don't think 
a lot of people have a lot to say about this. Just 
about the pain and the sorrow and the guilt. I felt 
guilt so many times, regrets. I believe we should talk 
to a ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^H 



|lt really showed the extent of the 
destruction, the full blast, what the collapse made of 



16 
I . GAT T AS 



I think that we were just as affected as 
everybody else, as any other members of any agencies 
involved and we should be given the same treatment and 
the same attention in terms of psychological stress and 
medical treatments, because we were very concerned 
after that. 

The fact that I felt all that itching and all 
that pain and I was so -- I'm telling you I was so 
exhausted for days and my legs hurt so much from 
running and coughing for a couple of days and I got a 
huge hematoma on my arm, which I don't know how I got 
it. I know it happened after the second collapse, 
something hit me. It went away eventually, but 
(inaudible) . 

I was very happy that I made it out and that 
all members of my Division made it out. That's all I 
have to say. 

Q. Thank you very much. 

A. Thanks to you for coming and for listening to 
my story. 

MS. BASTEDENBECK: This interview is now 

concluded. The time is 12:53. 



File No. 9110148 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMT MICHAEL D'ANGELO 
Interview Date: October 24, 2001 



Transcribed by Elisabeth F. Nason 



M. D'ANGELO 

MR. RADENBERG: Today is October 24, 2001. 
I'm Paul Radenberg of the Fire Department of the 
City of New York. Time is now 0845 hours. 
Q. I'm conducting an interview with -- 
A. Michael D'Angelo, EMT, badge 5645, assigned 
to Division 1, Battalion 4 of the EMS command, New York 
City Fire Department. 

Q. We are conducting the interview in the 
Division 1 conference room. This interview is 
regarding the events of September 11, 2001. Michael, 
would you? 

A. I work tour one. I was working tour one, 1 
Adam that day, which actually sits at the Trade 
Center. I got off at 8 o'clock in the morning. I 
returned to Battalion 4, changed into my civilian 
clothes, hung around for a few minutes and left 
approximately, little after 8:20. I proceeded over the 
Brooklyn Bridge towards home. I wasn't paying 
attention to the skyline on the BQE, but I'm sure if I 
was I would have seen the first plane hit. I was 
wondering why there was so much traffic. 

Making my way through traffic, I got into the 
area of the trench in Carroll Gardens between the 
Brooklyn Bridge and the Battery Tunnel when I received 



M. D'ANGELO 

a phone call from a family member saying that a plane 
hit the Trade Center. I then noticed numerous papers 
flying about in the air. First thing I did was I 
called up Battalion 4, I notified them I was returning 
to work. I then called my family and notified them 
what I was doing. 

Then as I made it through traffic and I was 
going over the BQE extension to get back on to the 
Battery Tunnel, I looked and I saw the second plane hit 
the building. I then made a round, I made my way into 
a line of fire trucks using my identification and went 
into the Battery Tunnel. I followed Ladder Company 132 
through the tunnel. It took a few minutes to get 
through to the other side. When I got through to the 
other side I parked my car on West Street, right around 
near, right about, right at the -- almost to the exit 
of where the Battery Tunnel empties out. 

I proceeded to run down West Street until I 
found an EMS Chief, Chief Goldfarb. He informed me, he 
says -- I told him I was off duty. He said okay, stay 
with me and my aide and you are going to assist us in 
setting up a command post. At first we were right next 
to where the Mayor had set up his command post and the 
original command post of where the Mayor was standing. 



M. D'ANGELO 

I was actually standing next to Chief Ganci before he 
ran in the building. I remember that distinctly. 

Then we moved it down. We moved down into 
the front of the American Express building. He wanted 
me to go inside and check out the inside of the 
American Express building to see if we could set up a 
triage area there, see if there was enough room. There 
was enough room, but we still weren't sure of where we 
were going to set up. I had a little bit of a table 
and everything set up outside with the command board 
and everything and we were just going through the steps 
of taking in units and we just weren't really sure if 
we were going to stay there right that second or -- so 
that went on for numerous times. 

As I watched the building burn, people jump 
out of the building, I can't tell you how long that 
was. Then I began to hear a rumble, I turned around 
and saw debris flying everywhere, the building came 
down. I ran up West Street, across Vesey and the whole 
street was blocked with emergency -- there was all 
trucks, but luckily there was a small Sedan command 
car, which I jumped over the hood and then ran up the 
block, up Vesey Street, then I got engulfed in a large 
cloud of -- 



M. D'ANGELO 

Q. So, on Vesey you were going towards the 
water? 

A. I ran in front of here. I ran across the 
street here and I ran west down Vesey Street. Then 
that big cloud of smoke hit you. At first I was -- at 
that point I didn't see Chief Goldfarb. I thought he 
was gone because he was standing on West Street at the 
time. I thought he was gone so I just -- I began by 
directing ambulances around, up North End Street, North 
End Avenue, because then they had set up, I believe 
they were about to set up a triage area in the back of 
the theaters, the Embassy Suites, I believe is what it 
was . 

I remember going back outside and I began 
pulling -- bringing firemen that were walking around 
covered and blind. I was just breaking out the water, 
cleaning out their eyes, cleaning out as many guys, 
seeing if anybody was hurt. I would just grab them, 
give them a quick pat down on their bodies to see if 
anything was broken or anything. A lot of them were 
just in shock, not sure where they were. 

I made my way down towards the water, where 
they were -- where those New York Waterway ferries were 
bringing over water and such. I was leaning over and 



M. D'ANGELO 

bringing that up. Again I kept cleaning eyes out. 
Something I noticed from when I was standing in front 
of the Embassy Suites at the time, I saw that the US 
Secret Service were bringing somebody, an Arab man in a 
suit, covered in soot, walking away in handcuffs. I 
remember that distinctly, because the guy looked right 
in my eyes . 

From there I remember just -- I don't 
remember treating, exactly treating guys, I was more 
like just seeing how severe people were. I mean I 
helped put guys in stair chairs, but in this time I'm 
not in my uniform. I had a T-shirt on and jogging 
pants. So I am just -- I remember assisting -- I moved 
Chief Cassano from one backboard -- one stretcher to 
another and I helped them put the collar on him, but 
around at that time it was a little bit fuzzy. 

Then we decided, me and somebody else - - I at 
this point, thought most of my Battalion was wiped out, 
until I started seeing a few faces. I only saw like 5 
or 6 faces and at least I knew they were okay. But 
then I decided to throw an extra -- I threw a few, I 
threw a few oxygen bags over my shoulder. I began 
running up Vesey Street again, not knowing that the 
second tower was going to come down as soon as I 



M. D'ANGELO 

reached the corner again. 

So I had to rip the stuff off my shoulders 
and run back up Vesey Street. I believe I dove into 
either the back of the American Express building or I 
dove into the 4 World Financial Center. Just dove into 
the doors and in the corner and then I realized this 
isn't exactly smart. I don't know how this building is 
coming down. So I ran out again. Ran down towards the 
water. Then I stayed upwards around the area, like I 
said, just continuing to grab people to see if they 
were okay, how bad people were, treated. I just 
remember I had one guy with just a laceration on his 
elbow. I just said to him, just go, go somewhere 
else. You will be okay, you can walk, leave the area. 
That's what I told any civilian, I said -- that wasn't 
hurt, run north, go north. I remember also after maybe 
the first tower fell, I skip around -- 

Q. That's okay. 

A. I remember hearing the F 15s flying overhead 
and that was scary because we thought they were flying 
more planes. I didn't know what was going on. I 
thought the guy brought 15 planes and were just going 
to fly them into the area, so I remember the F 15s 
flying overhead. I remember the big, big cloud of ash 



M. D'ANGELO 



that just --it didn't make it towards the water 
really. For some reason it stayed away from the water, 
I remember that. 

But -- that's basically what I kept doing. I 
was directing traffic and I didn't really like sit down 
and bandage anybody or nothing like that, but I was 
really just giving people on site triage. I found 
firemen that I knew and asked if they were okay. 
That's basically what I was doing. I was just checking 
them. I mean I was just taking bottles of water and 
cleaning their face and cleaning the soot out. I made 
them lie down on the ground and irrigate their eyes. I 
did that for, like I said, an unknown amount of time. 
That's what I did there until about probably 11 
o'clock. 

Q. Okay. Do you remember where on West Side 
Highway you met up with Chief Goldfarb? 

A. Right about the pedestrian bridge. 

Q. South one? 

A. Yes, right before the south pedestrian 
bridge. 

Q. Between Cedar -- 

A. Right around there I saw him and I got his 
attention . 



M. D'ANGELO 

Q. Okay. And -- 

A. My car was like really at the exit to where 
the Battery Tunnel. That was my car. 

Q. From when you met up with Chief Goldfarb, you 
came up here to -- 

A. No, first we went here. We were going to set 
up a command post at where the Mayor was. That garage 
there at first we were setting up. Then we were told 
to move down to here and set up a triage area inside 
the American Express building. That's where we started 
massing units, like I remember numerous ambulances just 
parked in the street here. Fire trucks lined the 
block. ESU trucks up the block here. The MERV, I 
remember the MERV almost hitting me in the back with 
its ramp. As I was running away they had the ramp 
still down. 

Q. Okay. Do you remember aside from Chief 
Goldfarb any other people from EMS that you encountered 
that morning? 

A. Let's see, who were the guys I found? I had 
one guy that worked with me. He was off duty too. He 
met with me. Brian Cirillo. He was with me until the 
second --he was with me almost, like in and out until 
we ran back up the block for the second collapse. Then 



10 

M. D'ANGELO 



we ran back and then I lost him for the day. I didn't 
see him for the rest of the day. I saw the unit of 2 
Boy on North End Street. That was Mike Mejias. 

Q. An EMS unit? 

A. Yes, EMS unit. EMS. Another guy, Garfield 
Gray, he was driving --he was running back in and 
bringing whatever undamaged vehicles, ambulances back 
down around the street, because they had lined up on 
North End to do their jobs. I remember that. 

I remember -- actually I remember one guy. 
He is a paramedic. I don't remember his name. I 
remember it distinctly because he met up with us at the 
first command post. And he had like maybe a 
-- something with wolski I think. He was a paramedic 
off duty, but his wife was, he said his wife was up on 
-- I don't know, I don't know the name. His wife was 
I believe at work at one of like the hundred and 
something floor in one of the buildings. I think it 
was the north tower. I remember that distinctly 
because he just --he really was just very emotionally 
broken up. He wasn't able to work. 

Q. Right. 

A. I didn't see him after that either. I don't 
know what happened to him. Obviously he is alive, 



11 

M. D'ANGELO 



because I'd hear about it. Like I said I don't 
remember the last name. 

I saw who I thought were gone -- was my - - 1 
Adam, the unit I work with, tour two guys. You see 
that 89 is Church and Fulton Street. So I thought they 
were the first ones gone. They managed to get out 
because they took the first people out. They pulled 
the first people out of there and I managed to meet one 
of them, one of the partners down here, down in front 
of the Embassy Suites. 

I remember too, the cars started to explode 
inside the parking lot. I mean, the cars started 
cooking off, they started going off, boom, boom, boom, 
boom. I remember that. 

Q. Do you remember the partner's name from 1 
Adam that you met on -- 

A. Yes. Frank Puma. 

Q. Puma? 

A. Yes. So that's -- like I said, I remember 
seeing a Chief running across the street. I remember 
that distinctly. I remember seeing the Mayor 
distinctly. I remember seeing the Commissioner arrive 
and make his way to the command post. 

Q. Commissioner Von Essen? 



12 
M. D'ANGELO 



A. Yes. I don't remember seeing any deputy -- 
Commissioner Feehan . I remember seeing numerous people 
jump from the windows. I remember that distinctly. I 
saw numerous people jump. Then actually when I found 
my car, I found my car like later, later on in the day, 
but I left it there, because it was not able to be 
moved because it was covered. There was an airplane 
tire about 10 feet away from it. I remember that. 

Q. Right. 

A. So yes, basically I just stayed and I did as 
much as I could as long as I could, you know. The one 
thing I don't know -- I just didn't have my uniform on 
me. I would have liked to have my uniform and a helmet 
on my head because that was -- but then again maybe I'm 
lucky I didn't have a helmet on my head. Like I said, 
I just didn't have my equipment on me. Now I keep it 
with me at all times. I keep everything in my trunk. 

I was running around in a pair of jogging 
pants and a white T-shirt until I finally actually 
picked up an EMS turnout coat I found. That's what I 
did. Actually the only thing I did have -- no, yes, 
that's about it. That's about it. Yes. 

Q. Any thoughts or comments or opinions you 
would like to add about the morning? 



13 
M. D'ANGELO 



A. About this? It was -- at the time I just -- 
adrenaline was so high. I just -- I just did what I 
-- like I was -- like I'm not sure what guided me to 
do what I did. I don't know what kept me from -- maybe 
seeing that Chief is what kept me from going into the 
building, maybe not having my equipment on. I don't 
know. Maybe I wouldn't have done it even then. But 
like I said, I was there at quarter to eight in the 
morning on Fulton Street. So who knows. I don't 
know. But I did the best I could. That's all I could 
say. I wish I could have done more but I did what I 
could do at the time. 

Q. Okay, thank you. 

A. No problem. 

MR. RADENBERG: The time is now 0902. The 

interview is concluded. 



File No. 9110149 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMT MICHAEL MEJIAS 
Interview Date: October 24, 2001 



Transcribed by Elisabeth F. Nason 



M. MEJIAS 

MR. RADENBERG: Today is October 24, 2001. 
I'm Paul Radenberg of the Fire Department of the 
City of New York. The time is now 0917 hours. 
Q. I'm conducting an interview with -- 
A. Specialist Michael Mejias, badge 5737. 
Battalion 4, Station 11. 

Q. We are conducting the interview in the office 
of the Division 1 conference room, and this interview 
is regarding the events of September 11, 2001. 
Michael, if you would -- 

A. All right. My partner and I were driving 
along South Street getting pretty close to the 
station. It was around maybe 8:45 to 8:50, when I 
noticed that a wave of ambulances and EMS crews and ESL) 
and PD and Fire Department are racing down South Street 
to go to the downtown area. Said to my partner that 
that has got to be an awesome job, downtown somewhere, 
big job. 

Then as we continue on, we were only like a 
block away from the station, I see people looking up in 
the sky. Finally my curiosity gets to me. I told my 
partner stop the car, because we drove in together. 
Stop the car, stop the car. I got to look. I get out 
and I see the World Trade Center with a gigantic black 



M. MEJIAS 

hole in the building, on fire. So I go to my partner, 
Jody, Joe, let's run. We run into the Battalion 4 
station. I said Jody, this is a big job. We got to 
go, go, go, go. We got an the adrenaline rush and by 
that time, Battalion 4, my supervisor, Bill Melarango, 
says get changed, get changed, grab a radio, go sign a 
radio, grab a bus, go, go, go, go. 

We go upstairs to change. My partner, he was 
already in uniform because he was driving in with his 
uniform. He already grabbed his bags. He went 
downstairs from the locker room. I was getting 
changed, I grabbed my stuff and I ran down there. I 
grabbed vehicle 240 and a radio. I proceeded down 
there. My partner had already left because they sent 
him with another extra person that was standing by. He 
got changed before I did. 

I got into vehicle 240. I raced down there 
behind, with my supervisor, he was in the command car 
behind me and I stopped on Broadway and Fulton was my 
first stop. I had -- there were people coming on to me 
in hysteria, and I remember there was one lady who was 
hysterical and I just grabbed her and I told her listen 
ma'am, you got to be calm for me, you got to be strong 
for me. What is happening here is a really horrendous 



M. MEJIAS 

thing, I don't got time to deal with you right now. We 
got a lot of seriously hurt patients. She was with her 
girlfriend. She goes yes, I understand that. She said 
just go save somebody. I told her and her girlfriend 
to walk towards north. Get out of the way. 

Then there was a crowd of people there on 
Fulton and Broadway, and I was screaming at them, 
listen, get out of the way, go to north, go north. A 
lot of shrapnel and a lot of stuff going on there. 
Things falling off the building, I didn't want anybody 
to get hurt. Then this other lady comes up to me and 
she just looks at me and she said I have dust in my 
eye. Could you look at my eye. I told her listen, can 
you see me. She says yes. I said listen, your eyes 
are fine. I put a green tag on her, triage tag, and I 
told her Beekman Hospital is two blocks away. Just 
walk straight down Fulton Street and seek help there. 
I gave her a little 4 by 4. She had a little cut on 
her finger. 

Then this kid comes up to me. He is around 
20 something years old. He said he is an Army medic 
and that he wants to help and I didn't have a partner 
at the time so I took off my hat and I said you are my 
partner now. I gave him my EMS hat. We both got into 



M. MEJIAS 

the ambulance together. We road up Fulton to Vesey and 
as we are driving up Vesey past the Trade Center we see 
a severed leg. We run over that severed leg and I 
stopped at West Street. 

When I stop at West Street and Vesey, there 
was a Lieutenant there who was setting up the staging I 
guess for the ambulances. He said let's move the 
ambulance towards the water. He just probably saved 
me. I don't even know his name, but I would recognize 
his face. He said move the ambulance towards the water 
and I parked it in between West Street on Vesey and 
North End. 

My partner had already set up a triage, 
triage center by the World Financial Center there, on 
the side, by Vesey. So we had like three or four or 5, 
maybe 5 patients. Two of them were walking wounded. I 
think 2 or 3 of them were burned, second degree burns. 

As we are working up the patients and we are 
trying to get organized, there is rumors that there is 
a second plane coming. I thought nothing of it because 
you go on jobs, sometimes you get hysteria, people 
thinking there's more than what is going on. Shortly 
after that, the second plane came. I hear a big rush, 
like a low flying jet and I see a massive explosion. 



M. MEJIAS 

Now I'm getting a little nervous because now I know 
it's not an accident. Now I know that the first plane 
was deliberate and the second plane is deliberate. Now 
we got a problem. 

So I'm thinking to get these patients out of 
there. The nurses in the triage area by the World 
Financial Center, there was nurses over there. I 
didn't even know where they came from. They must have 
came from the buildings that have nursing clinics. 
Some of these buildings downtown, they have nursing 
clinics in the centers there. 

Q. Excuse me, this was in front of the American 
Express building? 

A. Yes. Right on the side of Vesey, North End, 
World Financial, whatever it is, in the middle of the 
block. There was ambulances parked and we had no 
officer to give direction at the time, because it was 
like we were trying to organize. So I was the senior 
guy there at the time. My partner was there with me 
and another guy from station 13. I forget his name. 
He told me that you guys interviewed him already. He 
was there. 

There was an ambulance crew in an ambulance 
and I grabbed the crew and I said listen, we got to get 



M. MEJIAS 

these people out of here. It's dangerous. So we put 
the lady who was burned in the stretcher, put her in 
the ambulance. Then I had the guy that was burned on 
his back, put him in the stair chair, wheeled him over 
to the ambulance and told him listen, I know it's going 
-- you are going to have to sit, sir. I know it's 
going to be painful for you but I got to get you out of 
here. It's not safe. He goes no, that's all right, 
guy. Get me out of here, get me out of here. 

So I put him in the ambulance. The lady was 
in the stretcher. Her husband was a walking wounded, I 
sent him and then there was another two, I don't 
-- can't remember. All of them had triage tags. I 
told the crew listen, don't even worry about an ACR. 
They got triage tags, get them out of here. Take them 
to Cornell. That's what I was thinking, ship them to 
Cornell, but they didn't listen to me. They took them 
to somewhere like St. Vinny's or somewhere, because 
with a thing like that, forget about the burn. You have 
to get as many patients as you can out. 

Then as we are trying to get this other lady, 
who was HYS, you know, she was in the stair chair, I'm 
trying to calm her down. I was waiting to get another 
ambulance to get her out of here, but she was on 



M. MEJIAS 

delayed status because she was just HYS, there was 
nothing really wrong with her. She was hysterical like 
the rest of us, you know. 

The building started collapsing, the north 
tower started collapsing. It tipped down first and 
then the thing fell within itself. It was an amazing 
sight to see. It was really unbelievable. I thought I 
was watching a movie with special effects. 

Then from there people were rushing towards 
us. We ran all the way towards the water, as far to 
the water as we could go, on Vesey past North End 
towards the water where the park is. It was like a 
mushroom cloud of dust and debris coming towards us and 
everything. But it didn't really --we were safe 
because we were surrounded by other buildings. If the 
tower would have fell towards West Street instead of 
imploding on itself, we would have had a problem, but, 
you know, it just came within itself, just tipped. 

We waited there till things calmed down. 
There were a lot of firemen coming towards us with eye 
problems, like irritating of their eyes, irritation of 
their eyes. We were throwing water all over them, 
trying to irrigate their eyes. Trying to clean them up 
best we could. Nobody really seriously -- serious 



M. MEJIAS 

trauma, but there was one guy, he had a real bloody 
nose. We cleaned him up best we could. 

There was equipment strewn all over the place 
because everybody was running. EMS equipment. So we 
had a stretcher, I don't know whose stretcher it was. 
We grabbed the stretcher, told my partner, listen, we 
got to get back in the game, man. So we loaded the 
stretcher with all the equipment that we could find. 
My bus, 240, was parked on North End, right behind the 
logistics truck, Alan Cruz, our supply truck, and I was 
heading back to my ambulance because I was going to put 
the stuff back, but they told us to go to the hotel on 
North End, I forget, Embassy Suites, I think it is? 
Q. Yes. 

A. They already set up a triage there. So we 
brought all the equipment that we had, that we found, 
over there. Shortly after we get there, they want to 
evacuate us out of there, because they are worried 
about gas leaks, they are worried about integrity of 
buildings, you know, because the front of the building 
by the movie theater, that little space there was on 
fire. So now they were worried about gas leaks and all 
the other stuff. 

We evacuate, we go to Stuyvesant, Stuyvesant 



10 

M. MEJIAS 



High School from there. I don't know even know what 
street that's on. Chambers, it's a little side street, 
but it's not Chambers, it's a different name. Anyway, 
where Stuyvesant High School is. I don't know where 
that is. 

Q. Okay. 

A. So we go over there. We evacuate all the 
patients that we have there, we have like walking 
woundeds in the area. Only a few. We got them out of 
there, out of that hotel. We grabbed as much equipment 
as we could. We evacuated and walked down to 
Stuyvesant. We loaded as much as we could on 
ambulances and walked down. They were setting up 
triage there. I didn't even go in . I stayed right 
there outside. Then they started saying there is a gas 
leak over there and they are worried about something 
happening over there. 

Finally they make a decision to evacuate all 
the emergency personnel to Chelsea, but my ambulance is 
still on North End and Vesey. So I give my keys to the 
equipment truck guy, Allan Cruz, because he was 
gathering up all the ambulances, because we had all the 
equipment now in front of Stuyvesant High School. So I 
gave him the wrong set of keys. He didn't have the 



11 

M. MEJIAS 



ignition key. 

So he came back and said Mike, you gave me 
the wrong set. I said okay, I will get the bus. So I 
ran back in. It was like inches of soot, it looked 
like snow. It was incredible. I went back there and I 
grabbed the ambulance. It was still in good shape. 
Didn't get hit with any debris. I went back and I 
carted as much stuff as I could. I still have this kid 
with me now. He was with me, me and my partner, then 
we put all the stuff in the -- Chief Carrasquillo told 
us to go to Chelsea. 

Put as much equipment as we had in there and 
as we are driving up West Street to go to Chelsea, we 
are picking up all kinds of medical personnel who were 
walking, because everybody got evacuated to there, so 
we could set up a staging and a triage and a MASH unit, 
which they did an awesome job. It was incredible. I 
don't know if you were there. 

Q. No. 

A. It was awesome. I was in the military as an 
Army combat medic, not war time, but I had training in 
that. It reminded me, everything was perfect man. It 
was like a MASH unit set up in there, in like a 
warehouse. We had ambulances lined up in rows and we 



12 
M. MEJIAS 



were all waiting for that call to go down there to save 
some lives and that call never came. 

That was the most saddest thing about it, 
that with a job this size, this magnitude, I was saying 
to myself there is going to be numerous injured and we 
are going to have to really depend on our skills. Not 
a call. So that was the biggest thing. So I waited 
and waited and waited, me and my partner and this kid. 

Finally I told the kid, I said listen, there 
is nothing you can do here. It's already done. Me and 
my partner go thanks, guy, thanks for coming in. He 
left and we brought the equipment that we had in the 
ambulance, we brought it in to the triage, the MASH 
unit that they had, because they might need equipment. 
So we just kept our base equipment for the bus. 

That was it. I ran out of gas so what I did 
was I told the Lieutenant, listen, I'm going to be 
going to -- I'm going to get gas. He said when you get 
gas, go to 911, go back to the 911 system, because 
there was no patients. Then, you know, I will admit I 
cheated a little bit. 

When I went out getting gas, I went down to 
Whitehall Street, because I knew they were setting up a 
MASH unit there and I wanted to be where the patients 



13 
M. MEJIAS 



were. We waited there. The Lieutenant said I need 
you, come in here. We went there. We stayed there 
another eight hours, waiting and waiting and waiting 
for patients. No show. It was like -- I think that 
was the toughest thing, is that a job that magnitude 
you would expect thousands and thousands of patients. 
After the first wave, nothing. There were no 
survivors. 

That's about it. I probably missed a few 
things. There was a package, when I -- this is like a 
funny story about this job too. There was a package 
that when I came back to the ambulance with all the 
equipment, it was open, my ambulance. I had both 
keys. I said, what's this package here doing in my 
ambulance? After all the building collapses and 
everything else, I didn't even think about it again. 

I put the equipment in there. We went to the 
hotel and then we went to Stuyvesant, then we went up 
to Chelsea is when I realized. I said there is a 
package, I don't know how it got there. So I took it 
out. Now I'm getting a little nervous. That's what I 
was just -- relax. It's not an ordinary Tuesday any 
more, so paranoia set in. Because at the time I really 
didn't think about it because there was such chaos. 



14 
M. MEJIAS 



So I go to my partner and I go Jody man, 
there is a box, I had both keys and this box was found 
in my ambulance. What should I do with it. He goes 
get that out of here. What are you, crazy man. So I 
was going to throw it in the garbage can, but I said 
that's unsafe because what if somebody came and left 
another device. 

So what I did I put it in the island on West 
Street at Chelsea, and I flagged down a PD and the FBI 
and I told them and they had the bomb squad check it 
out. It wound up being a wedding present or 
something. It was addressed to Norway, but there was 
nothing we could have done about that, you know. It 
was chaotic there. You started thinking about things 
that might possibly happen. (inaudible) just waited. 

Q. Okay. When you got to Broadway and Fulton, 
who was the supervisor? You said that he moved 
you over? 

A. On Broadway and Fulton, my supervisor was 
behind me. He left, he went towards the building 
somewhere. I don't know even know where he went to be 
honest with you. 

Q. Who was it? 

A. Bill Melarango. He was behind me in the 



15 
M. MEJIAS 



command car. He did his administrative stuff. I don't 
know where he went. I was there with me and this kid 
after. When I got to West Street, West Street and 
Vesey is when the supervisor, I don't know who he was. 
I seen him before. I don't know his name, but he might 
have saved my life, because I was parked at West Street 
and he told me listen, I want you to move that 
ambulance towards the water. 

Q. Right, right. 

A. So that's when I went from West Street and 
Vesey to North End where the supply truck was. I 
parked behind there and I walked to the triage area in 
the middle of the block. There was already ambulances 
set up on Vesey between North End and West Street, 
right in front of the movie theater, you know the movie 
theater. 

Q. Yes. 

A. Right over there by the --in the middle of 
the block. So I grabbed an EMS crew and we got rid of 
the patients that were happening over -- 

Q. The crew that you helped with the burn 
patients -- 

A. I see them before, but I don't know their 
names, but when I see them I'm going to give them a 



16 
M. MEJIAS 



good hug tight, because they got those people out of 
there. 

Q. Do you remember their vehicle number or 
anything like that? 

A. You know, I seen them before, I don't know if 
they were from Queens or Brooklyn or 15. One of them 
had a -- the older guy, he is a veteran because I have 
seen him before. He wears glasses and he has like a 
lazy eye that goes with (inaudible). His partner is a 
short guy, an Italian guy. I seen them, I know that 
they are both veterans. But I don't really know their 
names. They are not really from my station. But when 
I see them I'm going to congratulate them. They did an 
awesome -- they got those patients out of there and 
that's the main objective. 

Q. Okay. Any thoughts or comments on the day 
that -- 

A. I remember, this is where I -- as you notice 
that nobody from our station, Battalion 4, got killed. 
Seriously, we should have lost half our people, because 
we are taught, when the job, when the World Trade 
Center job comes over, it gives you a whole bunch of 
pages on where to set up, what to do, have you ever 
seen -- 



17 
M. MEJIAS 



Q. Yes. Pre-plans. 

A. The pre-plans. The pre-plans always say go 
to the concourse to the triage. Because we were the 
first wave and we got so many patients, that 
technically you are supposed to do triage and the 
patients had to wait until you get them out of there. 
But we got such a big wave of patients, we were taking 
them to the hospital, weren't really doing what we were 
supposed to be doing, triage, and setting up. That's 
what saved our lives believe it or not, in my opinion. 

Because technically we were supposed to set 
up triage, no patients get transported until we triage 
them out. Then we go to the concourse and set up 
triage there and then we would go to various levels, 
after we get organized, go to various levels of triage 
on various floors. Because we didn't have a chance to 
organize because of the attack, because it turned out 
to be an attack instead of an accident, you know, 
that's what saved us. By the grace of God, I think 
that's what saved us, that we didn't really have a 
chance to organize. 

It was so chaotic and debris all over the 
place. Because I know --my own set-up would probably 
be in the building too. You know, so I think that's 



18 
M. MEJIAS 



what happened. It was a fuck up, but it really was 
-- it saved our lives, this little miscue. We didn't 
really go procedure wise. That's why we were saved. 
Some rules are meant to be bent, broken, right. 

Q. Yes. 

A. That's about it. I'm just glad everybody 
survived. I get a little teary-eyed when I see all 
these funerals, all these people, they have young 
kids. It's amazing, but that was about it. 

MR. RADENBERG: Okay. I will first thank you 

for your time. The time is now 0936 hours. The 

interview is concluded. 



File No. 9110151 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

EMT ALEXANDER LOUT SKY 

Interview Date: October 24, 2001 



Transcribed by Elisabeth F. Nason 



A. LOUT SKY 

MR. RADENBERG: Today is October 24, 2001. 
I'm Paul Radenberg of the Fire Department of the 
City of New York. The time is now 0632 hours. 
Q. I'm conducting an interview with -- 
A. EMT Alexander Loutsky of Battalion 4. 
Q. This interview is being conducted at EMS 
Battalion 4 regarding the events of September 11, 
2001. Alex, begin with when you were assigned to the 
job or -- 

A. Okay, well, what happened was I had just 
exchanged vehicles at Battalion 4 around, a little 
after 8:30 and I was in vehicle -- I was reassigned to 
vehicle 219. As I was going back to my area, which is 
a few blocks from the World Trade Center, I was talking 
with my partner, Hank Ramos, and saw in front of me 
while we were about, I would say around Pearl Street, 
we had a view of the World Trade Center, which was only 
a few blocks away and I stopped him and I said to look 
at that plane, that it was flying extremely low and 
that it looked like it was about to hit. A few seconds 
later it did hit. 

After that, we were both kind of shooken up. 
I picked up the radio and I transmitted a priority 
signal to let them know that it was an EMS confirmation 



A. LOUT SKY 

that a plane had in fact hit the World Trade Center. 
After that, the dispatcher acknowledged it, but the 
radio then became flooded with so many different 
signals that we weren't able to really let him know we 
were headed there. 

We were just a couple of blocks from there, 
so we did, we headed there and we were -- we went to 
Church and Fulton Street, which was right by the 
Millennium Hotel. We actually were right by -- 
actually, originally I should say we were more close to 
the St. Pauls cemetery, we were parked right there. 

When we got there, we noticed that there was 
a great number of people that were streaming out of the 
World Trade Center. They looked terrified. They were 
panicked. Some of them had various degrees of 
injuries. Many of them were just running wounded, as 
it were, but they had varying degrees of injuries, but 
they were running, so forth and so on. We were 
basically inundated. 

We couldn't radio -- I was operating the 
vehicle that day, so I was supposed to be making the 
radio transmissions and I just found it impossible to 
do it because it was just -- inundated, just jammed 
with so many signals that I wasn't able to. We had so 



A. LOUT SKY 

many victims that came up to us that -- some of them my 
partner was attending to, others I tried to make an 
attempt; however, it was a vain attempt at having a 
triage and trying to line them up and tag them. 

There were just too many of them and many of 
them were asking questions and some of them were in 
such shock that their questions seemed, you know, just 
a waste of time. Like should I go back in and get my 
wife or something like that. We tried our best that 
way. 

Then what happened is the second unit came 
behind us, I believe it was 2 Boy. It was David 
Timothy and I can't recall offhand who he was working 
with, oh, Jai Zion. I believe he resigned. They then 
came and together we tried to do the same thing. Then 
at that point, a fire truck came through and we started 

-- then we started to realize that with the amount of 
people swelling, that the area was going to become 
difficult for further emergency resources to get 
through. So we tried to make room and so forth and so 
on . 

Then I guess just about that time, if my 
memory serves me, it was Lieutenant D'Avila, he came on 
the scene and we were able to at least have some 



A. LOUT SKY 

semblance of a command. When that occurred, he had 
ordered us to go -- to proceed with him to West Street, 
really in between Vesey and Liberty, more like where 1 
World Trade Center was. We had a number of victims who 
became our patients, and we were successfully tagging 
them and I would say less than 10 at the time, you 
know. Many people were just running with their 
injuries. The ones that were willing to receive help, 
you know, probably had, for whatever reason, they took 
our help. 

At any rate, what happened at this time was 
we were trying -- Lieutenant D'Avila said that our -- 
01 Charlie, which was our unit, that my partner and 
myself were staging officers and that we were to focus 
solely on that and not to get sidetracked by other 
things. So we did that. 

Our duties separately were to try to help get 
the people in ambulances and out of there and to try to 
get the ones that were -- had injuries that were not so 
life threatening, to get them out of the borough so 
that they don't inundate hospitals and to do the best 
we can in terms of getting names or what ambulances 
went where and so forth and so on. 

Around that time, I didn't at the time 



A. LOUT SKY 

realize it, but from where we were at, which was right 
in front of the World Trade Center on the West Side 
Highway area, there was an explosion and a lot of 
debris started coming down. Apparently that was the 
second plane that hit. We lost all of our patients in 
terms of them running away. They -- the noise and the 
debris scared them all away and they ran off. We 
didn't have any left. 

We went into our vehicle and Lieutenant 
D'Avila went into the command vehicle and we started 
proceeding towards the direction of Liberty in our 
ambulance and there was a tremendous amount of debris 
coming down in that area. We just took a turn up 
Liberty this way to do a U turn, because this was like 
destroyed. 

Q. Okay. Towards the Hudson. 

A. Right, so a lot of things were raining down. 
We knew we had to get out of there. We turned around 
and we went back on the West Side Highway, made a right 
turn on Vesey and then made a right turn on Fulton and 
Church and we were at the Millennium Hotel area once 
again . 

There we were under -- we had more resources, 
more emergency medical command resources arrived and we 



A. LOUT SKY 

were still functioning as staging officers as 
Lieutenant D'Avila directed us to be and it seemed like 
that was going very successfully in terms of evacuating 
people out of there. In front of the Millennium Hotel, 
that became a triage area. It was effective. It was 
-- people were tagged, it seemed very organized. It 
was good because there was so many people, so many 
people coming out of there, and some of them weren't 
able to ambulate, so they were being carried out, so 
forth and so on, so we were able to assist in that 
way. So I assisted numerous times, helping people, 
like taking them from civilians, so forth and so on. 

I did what I was instructed to do in terms of 
trying to get people that were at least the least 
amount of injuries out of the borough. We had a number 
of ambulances and we tried as best we could to put as 
many people as we can, as possible, without causing any 
kind of danger to them or anyone else. So we were 
successful in trying to get a maximum of 6 patients per 
ambulance. The more severe cases, you know, like the 
burns, the third degree burns and so forth that went to 
Cornell, we tried to keep patients of that kind, of 
that condition, together, or if they weren't burns, at 
least something that was -- that needed a trauma center 



A. LOUT SKY 

or something like that. 

We did that. I only had a little confusing 
time when I had certain -- you know, I had my 
instructions given to me from Lieutenant D'Avila, but 
there were at times, I was sidetracked by various 
Captains that were trying to give me different orders 
that were -- a few things that kind of sidetracked me 
and I didn't think it made entirely enough sense, but I 
tried the best I could to obey it. 

But it was very crazy there at the time. 
Like one of them wanted me to get every single 
patient's name and it just was not possible. There was 
so much screaming and it just seemed like the worst 
question to ask in the middle of an ambulance while 
people are suffering and screaming. It just didn't 
work out that way. 

I did my best you know, in terms of that. 
But I, you know, I just continued to do and keep my 
focus as Lieutenant D'Avila told me to do, just to 
focus on what I was doing, because I know that if I 
started getting sidetracked, then nothing was going to 
get accomplished, so that's why I just stayed stuck 
with what I was doing. 

So then actually, right around that time when 



A. LOUT SKY 

I had that little confusion in my mind because I was 
told to do something that just didn't seem to -- it 
just seemed like certain brass in my mind was like -- 
maybe they just had, like they really didn't have much 
street time or something. If you don't mind me saying 
that. They were like in an office so much and then 
they are asking me with their authority to do something 
that's not going to be productive, but I can't question 
it, but do you know what I mean? 

Q. Yes. 

A. So I was in that little quandary at the time, 
because I'm saying well how -- I'm trying to get the 
names, but the person is screaming in agony and they 
want to get them out of there. Then another person is 
screaming. I can't even hear them, you know. I'm 
trying to comply with this, you know, but what was 
mostly more important was evacuating them, getting them 
treated and transported out of there. Because even 
though I didn't, and I didn't think that anybody 
thought that the buildings were going to collapse, we 
knew it was not a safe scene. There was debris. There 
was all kinds of things that could possibly happen. 
We knew we weren't necessarily in the hot 
zone, but we were in the wrong zone. So the risks 



10 
A. LOUT SKY 



increase. So we just wanted to, you know, rather than 
deliberate too much on one thing like that, but anyway, 
at any rate, I -- at that time, I heard a rumble, you 
know, and then it was, you know, really like, almost 
like an earthquake. 

Then what happened was I heard people 
screaming and running and then it seemed like they were 
going to -- it was like going to be a trampling. It 
was just like bedlam. Of the patients that we had that 
had any ability to ambulate or maybe didn't think they 
did, had, then had the ability to. 

Q. Found it. 

A. Then I started to run for safety too, because 
I looked up and I saw that the building was going to 
come down. We were right across the street from it, 
you know, so I -- at first I -- there was so many 
people, I thought they were going to trample me, that I 
went by the Millennium Hotel, there is like a driveway 
with one of those automatic lifting gates, steel gates 
that roll up. 

I went there. There was a cop there, he was 
kneeling down, looking, trying to get cover and I was 
above him and I said there is no security here. There 
is no place to go, you know. I was under a truck for a 



11 

A. LOUT SKY 



second or two, because, well, I ducked down, you know, 
because there was so many people and there was -- they 
were just going to roll, you know, trod me. 

So what happened was I -- suddenly, I was 
near that garage area, the sky as it blacks out, and 
then all of a sudden, it just came down. There was no 
place to go. There was nothing you could do. You were 
just thoroughly overcome by the particulate matter. It 
just went totally black. You no longer heard 
anything. It was like your fingers were in your ear, 
everything was just numbed out. There was so much 
particulate matter that it covered every orifice. You 
couldn't take a breath in. You couldn't see. You 
couldn't anything. 

I was just kind of like putting my hand out 
and I didn't even know where -- I didn't know exactly 
which direction I was facing any more. I didn't know 
if I was -- I knew that I was on -- I knew that I was 
on Fulton Street, just off of Church, because I ran up 
to like here, right on the side of the Millennium 
Hotel, across the street from St. Pauls cemetery. But 
I didn't know if I was facing the cemetery. I didn't 
know if I was facing the Millennium Hotel. I didn't 
know if I was facing Church. I didn't know if I was 



12 
A. LOUT SKY 



facing Broadway. I was totally blind and 
discoordinated in that and I couldn't hear anything. 

More importantly, I couldn't breathe at all. 
I was kind of panicky about that. Then I thought maybe 
if I dug a hole in the cemetery and put my head in it 
or something. Or if I -- I didn't know what to do. I 
was very scared, because I knew I was going to die at 
that point. There was nothing, you know, I thought and 
I had some thoughts like I thought well, what if this 
is biological now or rather chemical. What if this is 
a bomb actually that went off after the plane crashed 
and now maybe there is something chemical. Then I said 
well, maybe the heat would have destroyed it. 

But that was real quick thoughts but it never 
really stayed with me because I was panicking, I was 
starting to panic and I didn't want to panic because I 
figured then I wouldn't have a chance, but then I 
thought I didn't have a chance anyway, because there 
was -- this particulate matter that was just causing 
total blackness and you couldn't even use any of your 
senses or breathe, wasn't going to settle, wasn't going 
to settle quick enough for me to catch a breath, so I 
kind of like realized that that was the situation, but 
it was hard for me to accept it entirely. 



13 
A. LOUT SKY 



So I kind of like was feeling around me and I 
was using my radio and I was banging around, and I was 
banging around. I knew when I touched a solid 
material, but because the particulate matter was so 
thick I didn't know what the matter was. I didn't know 
if it was concrete, wood or what, but what I did do and 
I hit it with my radio, was I heard glass crack, so I 
put my hand inside and then I put my head in and it 
turned out to be a van, which I didn't know fully at 
the time, but I figured it was a vehicle of some kind, 
because I felt a chair and stuff like that. 

So I put my head and half my body and I kind 
of went in and my head was down at the bottom and I was 
-- I had it covered with my jacket, but still the 
particulate matter was so dense and the pressure, as 
soon as the window was open it pushed it in, but it 
gave me enough where I just calmed myself and just told 
myself to just don't be greedy and take short breaths. 
I was under there and I was just taking short breaths, 
short breaths, and calm down so you don't require so 
much. It was hard to do that though, but I tried my 
best, you know. 

It worked. The particulate matter was 
settling a little bit. I mean it was like a fog and I 



14 
A. LOUT SKY 



started getting out of there. I came out, I was half 
in the vehicle. I came out of it and I could see now 
that it was a van and I could see Broadway, but 
everything was like a dense fog but I could know that 
that's where I was. I knew the hospital was down, a 
couple blocks down from there. So I started in that 
direction . 

I still couldn't breathe well, you know, 
because the particulate matter was still there, but I 
could see and I could take short breaths and I would 
cough a lot and stuff like that, but I tried my best 
and it did work and I got to the hospital, they gave me 
oxygen where I was standing and then they cleaned me up 
in the sink. They put my head in there and they took a 
pulse-ox of me while I was standing and stuff and you 
know, cleaned my face because it all caked and stuff 
like that. 

Then after that it was just -- a few minutes 
went by and I told them I'm done and I have to go 
back. They told me to stay and I said no, I told them 
I was fine, but I wanted to go back because I felt like 
I might have abandoned my post. I got my partner there 
and that was where I belonged. So I started going 
back, you know, and I was coughing and hacking a lot, 



15 
A. LOUT SKY 



but it didn't matter because I felt a lot better. I 
was just, you know, getting it out. 

So I went back and when I got back, I saw on 
Broadway, some of us were there. I saw men with 
Lieutenant D'Avila. He was getting -- jumped on me and 
hugging me and crying and everything. So I asked him 
where my partner was, where Eric is and they didn't 
know, you know. 

So I went back and that was on -- where I met 
them was on Fulton Street and Broadway, right here, so 
I just went back here where I was and I saw that it was 
-- it had collapsed, the north tower had collapsed. 
My ambulance was right over there. 

It was in flames and I met a firefighter 
there, Alex Santoro, and this police officer, I don't 
remember his name, and the three of us were, you know, 
we had gone through it. I didn't know they did. They 
didn't know I did. We wanted to try to find our 
people. I said where is my partner and the cop said I 
don't know where my partner is and stuff like that. 

So we decided to stick together rather than 
separate and try to see who could find anybody, you 
know, in this mess -- especially our people. So that's 
what we did. Then we were like right around here on 



16 
A. LOUT SKY 



Dey Street, like right here. 

Q. Dey and Church? 

A. Right, right across the street from the south 
tower and then the south tower, we heard a rumble and 
we didn't even look. We ran, okay. We ran. I tell 
you my legs were sore for three days after that, just 
that jog that I took. We ran from here, which is on 
Church Street and Dey. Okay. Right across the street 
was where the south tower was. 

So we were on, on Church and Dey Street, 
right here, right across the street, again, from the 
World Trade and when we heard that rumble, we didn't 
even look. It was like instinct, the three of us, 
without even looking at each other, just the beginnings 
of that rumble, we just sprinted out of there and we 
actually made it up Dey Street. We crossed Broadway 
and there was right in here a little chocolate candy 
store, okay. Now there is no way you can beat that 
thing when it collapses. There is no way at all. That 
I can tell you. So when we heard that rumble, that 
thing came down and the whole thing went black the 
second we went into that candy store. 

We slammed the door and as we slammed the 
door all of the particulate matter with the pressure 



17 
A. LOUT SKY 



that it had was billowing inside that chocolate store, 
but not enough to overcome us, you know and we were in 
there . 

We didn't know -- at this point there was a 
radio going on at this time. I remember it saying the 
Palestinians are taking responsibility for this. I 
don't know how accurate at that time that was, but it 
came off of that AM radio so we were kind of like 
looking at each other and -- I mean we didn't know what 
to make of it. We thought that maybe we were at war. 
Definitely we were at war, you know. I thought we were 
at war, because I didn't think that the plane to my 
knowledge, from what I understood, that the plane was 
enough to do that, you know. 

I thought we were at war. I didn't know if 
there was going to be any chemical stuff being used. I 
didn't have any -- I felt ill equipped in that 
respect. I didn't feel that I had anything to protect 
me with respect to that. 

We just decided that what we were going to do 
was -- we reaffirmed the fact that we were going to 
stick together, the three of us. We didn't know what 
was going on. We didn't know if we were going to get 
out of there. We didn't know that necessarily the 



A. LOUT SKY 

World Trade Center was fully collapsed or if it was 
going to collapse in the fashion that we now know it 
did, because there was an (inaudible) open. Might have 
fallen over. 

Q. Toppled. 

A. It was tall enough to crush where we were at 
without a doubt. So we were safe from the particulate 
matter, but we didn't feel safe in terms of us going to 
get crushed. 

We put that aside and Alex Santoro, the 
firefighter, he said well, Alex, let's just start 
saving up water, because the water main is going to go 
probably, more than likely. Because of the situation, 
they may shut them down. 

So I started to -- because it was a candy 
store, the old chocolate, big chocolate, you know, and 
it had these big glass jars, I started emptying them 
out, the chocolates put in a pile because we might use 
that as food too. I take the canister and clean it out 
and start filling it with water and then the other 
Alex, the firefighter, he would seal it with plastic, 
so he sealed the tops. That's what we were doing, 
because we didn't know how long we would be there, 
la-la-la, so that's what we did. 



19 
A. LOUT SKY 



We did that for a while. Seemed like a 
while. I got this -- I had a cellphone then that I had 
just got like two days before. I thought well, let me 
see if I can call somebody and see if anybody is 
around. If it's more extensive than we think, if I 
could give a message to my mother or my family or 
something like that. I couldn't get through. I tried 
a few numbers. One of them actually went through. It 
was an answering machine and I left a message on the 
answering machine, you know. It was a friend's friend 
that I really didn't know too well, but I left a 
message, you know, the last will and testament kind of 
thing, as if in fact they weren't going to be affected 
by it. So I did that. 

Then afterwards -- the cop was saying stay 
away from the doors, because if there is any frantic 
police officers out there they'll use their guns, so I 
remember that. Then I think there was also some 
civilians that we were able to get inside that were, 
you know, straggling, one or two of them. Couldn't 
breathe out there, and we wanted to get them in, but we 
had to do it quick, because the minute you opened that 
door, the whole thing would get filled, flooded. 

So anyway, we did that for a while and then 



20 
A. LOUT SKY 



as the thing started to settle, outside looked foggier 
instead of black. So we all decided let's go out and 
let's go find survivors. You know, so that's what we 
did. We started on -- let's see -- where did we go? 
I don't think -- yes, we were on John, but did we go 
down John. Yes, we went down John Street and every 
building side to side, we would go to. We tried to get 
in and see if there were any survivors and we found 
that there were quite a few buildings where people were 
hiding in the basements. We asked them if they had 
water or access to water. 

Me and Alex, we got big pipes that we had 
used, that if we needed to break into storage to get 
water, or food or at least have access to so they could 
get to it. Because at this point where we are at, it 
was such destruction and what we experienced was so 
horrific, we didn't know that we were at war and it was 
more prolific. We certainly were acting in a way that 
I think was sound and Alex led us in that respect, 
because we wanted to make sure that the survivors, you 
know, had water and so forth and so on. 

That's what we did. We went from building to 
building, going all the way down John Street. As we 
went down John Street, at some point we reached Water 



21 
A. LOUT SKY 



Street. At Water Street, things started to look less 
horrific and there was more people, you know, emergency 
personnel, and there was Chief Vlicharz. He is a 
Battalion Chief at Engine 4 on Duane and Broadway, our 
area, where 1 Charley is from. 

He said to me -- he knew me and he said to me 
that I should go right away to Engine 7, which is on 
South Street and Old Slip. That's about 5 or 7 blocks 
from where I met him and to go register there, because 
I'm missing and presumed dead. He said go over there 
and register there so they know that you are all 
right. Okay. 

Then he -- after that, I was supposed to go 
with a firefighter and we were supposed to go back to 
the World Trade Center and help get people out of 
there, you know. So I went to the fire house, my radio 
wasn't working all this time, by the way. So I went to 
the fire house, I registered over there in the logbook 
and the Captain is there and he asked my name verbally 
again and so forth. Okay, don't worry about it. He 
says, okay now. Go back to the World Trade Center and 
go help out over there. 

So I wasn't entirely sure what I was supposed 
to do, because I didn't know -- I didn't see anybody 



22 
A. LOUT SKY 



from my unit. I didn't see anybody that was -- I saw 
Chief Vlicharz. I didn't know where everybody else 
was. It just seemed a natural thing was to just follow 
direction from the Fire Department personnel, you know, 
and I -- they couldn't tell me where EMS was at the 
time. It was too crazy at the time and everybody was 
absorbed in their duties, which is understandable. 

So I started signing in and talking to the 
Captain as I say. Then my radio was working. I heard 
a command center at the ferry terminal was talking to 
someone else. I'm touching the radio you know, trying 
to hear better and putting it louder and stuff like 
that. So I told the Captain listen, it sounds like 
they have a command center at South Street ferry 
terminal, which is not far. The Chief directed me to 
go to the World Trade Center with him. 

Is it all right if I'm relieved of that so I 
can go and seek out, you know, my command. He says 
yes, go ahead. So I went and I went to the ferry 
terminal. I met up -- there was a couple of Chiefs out 
there. They just told me to direct, to help direct 
civilians that were being evacuated at this point. I 
believe the city was -- Mayor had made a directive to 
that effect I believe. 



23 
A. LOUT SKY 



What I was supposed to do is direct them to 
-- so I was directing them into various ferries. They 
had ferries going to Brooklyn, they had ferries going 
to Staten Island, ferries going to New Jersey and so 
forth and I was helping direct them. I did that for a 
number of hours, just getting them you know, where they 
are supposed to be going, so I assisted in that. 

After hours of doing that, it became night 
fall and I was upstairs helping them in the triage 
area. Then I guess after -- I was almost there for 16 
hours. Then there really wasn't anybody left in terms 
of victims. It just seemed like at that point we were 
saying that well, it looks like you are either dead or 
you are a walking wounded kind of thing. So I was told 
by a supervisor that since I live in Staten Island, 
just a boat ride away, just go home, refresh yourself 
and come back in the morning. 

That's what I did. I went home after 16 
hours. I tried to sleep, I couldn't sleep. I actually 
came back 3 hours later because I was very 
to sounds^ 



24 
A. LOUT SKY 



^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^| They over 

time . 

Basically that's the story. 

Q. Do you remember where -- when you saw the 
first plane go in, do you remember what streets you 
were on when you saw? 

A. Yes, I saw exactly where I was in my mind, 
but I'm trying to tell you the name of it. It is -- 

Q. Off the map? 

A. Yes, it's right in this white area. But I 
will tell you, it was City Hall park, like right around 
-- I would call it -- right by the Brooklyn Bridge and 
Pearl Street. 

Q. Okay. 

A. Right around the Brooklyn Bridge and Pearl 
Street. You got a view of it. It's like right in 
front of you. I'm sitting at the light and he is 
talking to me and I'm saying right, right, wo, look at 
that. It's going to hit. It's going to hit and that's 
when it hit. 

Q. When you first came into Fulton and Church, 
coming down Fulton, from down Church -- 

A. No, I came -- what I did was -- let's see, 



25 
A. LOUT SKY 



Pearl, went down -- sorry, went down by the Brooklyn 
-- where is the Brooklyn Bridge here? 

Q. Brooklyn Bridge would be up about here. 

A. Really. Let's see. 

Q. This is the top edge. 

A. At any rate, I will just say this. I came 
from Fulton Street. I went from Fulton Street, from 
where the Brooklyn Bridge would be here. I went down 
like this and went down like that. That's how I did 
it. 

Q. That's westbound on Fulton. 

A. Right. 

Q. All right. 

A. Is this westbound? Yes, you are right. 
Forgive me. Yes, this is westbound. 

Q. Put a number there. This is your first stop? 

A. Right. I was actually parked right inside 
here . 

Q. Inside of Fulton Street? 

A. Right over here we were parked, right here. 
Then we moved it over here. 

Q. Right. When you got around to -- in front of 
1 World Trade Center, it was you -- 2 Boy, I think it 
was, you said, 2 Adam? 



26 
A. LOUT SKY 



A. No, 2 Boy came here. 

Q. Did they follow you around to -- 

A. I don't recall, I don't recall, I suspect, 
but I can't say for sure. I kind of was like -- we 
were very close to the Lieutenant at that point and I 
think most of the -- I don't recall seeing them, but I 
don't recall, sorry. 

Q. No problem. When you came around to West 
Side Highway, do you recall aside from the Lieutenant, 
any other EMS units there? 

A. Well yes, there was a couple of paramedic 
units that came from hospital vollies . I recall a 
couple of Fire Department units there. I don't 
remember their designations. There was Lieutenant 
D'Avila and there was a Chief that came and there was 
some Lieutenants, Chief or something like that there, 
you know, that came, that were in that area with us. 
We had our patients right over here. Here. 

Q. Right. 

A. We were sitting down -- like over here, you 
don't see it in this picture, but over here, there is 
like a big wall that separates from World Trade Center, 
you know. 

Q. Right. 



27 
A. LOUT SKY 



A. Like that. 

Q. Yes. 

A. It was very protected because it was like an 
overhang, so nothing could affect anybody from that 
-- from that -- you know, from that. No one thought 
the building was going to come down, that's the whole 
thing. That's when it caught everybody in a surprise. 
I've heard people argue all different things, like what 
we could have done. 

Like -- I think we did very well, in terms of 
what we were trained to do. I think it worked very 
well with what our expectations were, because if we 
knew the building was going to collapse, you would have 
to be a quarter mile away from that place, because that 
building was going about a quarter mile high, so how 
far could you have been. You still would have been in 
danger, you know. So -- and it's part of our job. We 
don't want to be injured or killed because we want to 
be able to assist people, but we are in the warm zone 
and there is a certain risk involved. That's part of 
the job. 

But I think that we acted with due regard in 
a sober fashion. I'm very happy. There is a lot to 
learn I'm sure, and you guys are probably going to 



A. LOUT SKY 

bring that out. But I think that everything -- I'm 
glad that Lieutenant D'Avila was there and the others 
that led us in the right direction, you know. So. 
That's it. 

MR. RADENBERG: Okay, thank you very much. 

Time is now 0711 hours. The interview is 

concluded. 



File No. 9110152 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

EMS CHIEF RANDALL HIRTH 

Interview Date: October 24, 2001 



Transcribed by Nancy Francis 



R. HIRTH 

MR. RADENBERG: Today is October 24th, 2001. 
I'm Paul Radenberg of the Fire Department of the City 
of New York. The time is now 0820 hours and I am 
conducting an interview with Chief Hirth, Commander, 
Division 1, EMS, Borough of Manhattan. This interview 
is being conducted at the Division 1 office. 
Q. Chief? 

A. All right. We were at the Academy in 
refresher and the page came over that there was a 
problem at the World Trade Center. Lieutenant Cacciola 
was with me and I told her that we really need to 
respond. We got into the car. Lieutenant Roger Moore 
came out and requested transportation to go with us, so 
he jumped in the car with us and we proceeded to 
respond. We notified Citywide and proceeded to respond 
to the World Trade Center. 

En route there we could see that -- while we 
were en route a second plane hit the building, but we 
didn't see that, but we heard it over the radio. But 
we saw both towers burning. We came down through the 
Midtown Tunnel down to the FDR Drive and around to the 
Brooklyn Battery Tunnel. When I got to the Brooklyn 
Battery Tunnel, I decided that we should leave the car 
there and walk in the rest of the way. I didn't want 



R. HIRTH 

to block other emergency vehicles, particular fire 
trucks and everything else. So I left my car at 
Brooklyn Battery Tunnel and proceeded to walk to the 
World Trade Center down the West Side Highway. 

As soon as we got out of the car and we took 
our first few steps, we noticed the body parts in the 
street and I believe that's what we realized that this 
was going to be ugly. We proceeded to walk down the 
West Side Highway and we were trying to locate the 
command post, which was opposite the Trade Centers and 
in front of the World Financial Center. 

We walked up to the command post. That's 
where we left Lieutenant Roger Moore, at the command 
post, and Chief Kowalczyk requested that I respond to 
the north side of the second tower because they were 
having a lot of problems there and he asked if I could 
take command of that area over there. I agreed to do 
that and Lieutenant Cacciola was going with me and she 
suggested that we make our way, instead of down the 
West Side Highway, over to the Trade 7 tower because 
there was stuff coming off the building, debris and 
some people were still jumping at that point. So we 
decided to go through the World Financial building, 
down the corridor, come out the other side and be on 



R. HIRTH 

the north side of the tower. 

En route through there, she also suggested 
that we call our family members, make a quick phone 
call so they knew that we were safe, and I thought that 
was a good idea being that this was going to be an 
extended operation. So halfway through the corridor we 
stopped where there was a phone there and I called my 
wife and told her that she was going to see this on the 
news but not to worry, that I was safe, and I got off 
the phone. It was a quick conversation. I didn't have 
time to talk to her. Then she proceeded to call her 
mother and her sister. 

While she was telling her sister that she was 
safe, what I perceived to be the building started 
rumbling, the one we were in, and it was my impression 
that a third plane hit the building we were in. I had 
no idea that the first tower was collapsing, which we 
couldn't see at that point. But we looked down the 
hall from where we came and we saw the building 
starting to come down, and it was actually the roof of 
that building, but we thought the whole building was 
coming down. 

She dropped the phone and we proceeded to run 
to go out through the corridor into the Winter Garden 



R. HIRTH 

and try and run out the back way that way, out through 
the Winter Garden, but when we got down at the end of 
the hall and into the beginning of the Winter Garden, 
we saw the whole roof of the Winter Garden coming down 
and we knew that we couldn't make that an escape 
route. So we turned around and headed back into the 
corridor, and that's when it looked like a tidal wave 
of smoke was coming down the hall and it was just about 
to engulf us. 

So it was my impression at that point that 
the whole building was going down, that a third plane 
hit the building, and that we were probably going to be 
dead at that point. So I just yelled to her to dive 
into the corner of the hall, that possibly we could 
have some protection, and she dove into one area and I 
dove into another area. The rumbling, the building was 
rumbling, and we thought the whole building was coming 
down, people were screaming in the hall, the smoke 
engulfed us, we couldn't see, and there was just a loud 
rumble, a jet rumbling, alarms started going off and we 
actually thought we were going to die at that point. 

I don't know the time frame, how long that 
was going on for, but at one point everything went 
silent except for the alarm, a very, very loud alarm in 



R. HIRTH 

that building. Then we realized that the part we were 
in didn't collapse and then I got up and I had no idea 
where Lieutenant Cacciola was and I started to head 
back into the collapse here a little bit to see if I 
could find her, and that's when she yelled that she was 
behind me and she kept yelling and then I went back and 
through her voice I found her. 

Then I knew we had to get out of there 
because either it was going to collapse some more or 
the smoke was going to kill us. So we started to try 
and figure out a way to get out back this way somehow, 
through the Winter Garden again, and people were coming 
by us, they were running hysterical, and someone came 
by with a flashlight and pointed to go in some 
direction, and we just kept going in that direction 
until we saw an opening and then we just climbed 
through some rubble and wound up outside. 

At the point we got outside, I met up with a 
bunch of EMTs and a lot of people were injured outside, 
and it was still my impression at that point we were 
still under attack and a third plane hit our building. 
I still wasn't aware because when we got outside the 
whole area was covered with white smoke, thick white 
smoke that you couldn't see more than five feet in 



R. HIRTH 

front of you, if that much. I directed a bunch of EMTs 
to help whoever they could and leave the area and go 
where it's safe, and I had no idea where that was at 
that point because I was turned upside-down. I told 
them, I said, wherever they thought was safe, that's 
where they needed to go, and try and get these people 
out of here and that was it. I said they couldn't help 
anyone else at that point, they had to save themselves 
and just get whoever could out of there and that was 
all we could do at that point. 

So they started to go and we started to get a 
few of the injured people up that were laying there. 
We were telling them they had to get up, even though 
they're injured, they couldn't stay, that we would have 
people to help move them and they had to just help 
themselves and, if they laid there, they probably were 
going to get killed. So most of them got up and 
started walking even though they were bleeding and 
whatever their injuries were, and we pointed the 
direction which way they should go. There was too many 
of them for us to treat by ourselves, plus we didn't 
have equipment at that point. So they left and kept 
going. 

Q. You were sending them north on the West Side 



R. HIRTH 

Highway? 

A. North. We were telling them to go north 
because we knew we were on this side, the north side of 
the tower and you couldn't go south. So we were 
sending them north and figured somewhere they would 
meet up with responding units coming in and they would 
receive aid and help. We were going the same way 
because we had to get out of the smoke because we still 
couldn't breathe, and I guess we turned, and I'm not 
positive of this, but maybe on Vesey Street and made 
our way down to North Avenue. Somewhere in that 
vicinity we saw a trailer, a parks restoration trailer, 
that's what I remember reading on the sign, and we saw 
people in there. 

So we knocked on that door and they opened 
the door and let us in, and there was no smoke in 
there, so we were able to breathe a little again and 
they let us wash up, they gave us some water, they let 
us use the facilities, and then we tried to make some 
phone calls from there to see if we could get Citywide 
or whoever, but none of those calls were going 
through. Then we were able to get through to -- I was 
able to call my wife again, but for whatever reason, it 
wasn't letting calls go into Brooklyn. So on those 



R. HIRTH 

calls, I don't know why, but I was able to call my wife 
and no one else. 

Then someone knocked on that door of the 
trailer and said the second building was going to 
collapse and it was probably going to collapse onto 
this trailer and you had to get out of here or you were 
going to die. So we came back out and there were 
scores of people still running north and we just got in 
with them and we started running with them. I guess we 
were going north on North Avenue and probably on Murray 
Street, instead of following the crowd north on North 
Avenue -- and I'm not positive but I think we turned on 
Murray and we went down to the driving path or 
whatever, the walkway on River Terrace, and that's 
where we watched that whole building collapse and we 
realized at that point that both towers were down and 
we thought we were still under attack at that point. 

There was a large group of people with us and 
we started going north again on River Avenue until we 
came up to the school, and after the school is the West 
Side Highway to turn and go north again. But what 
happened at the school was there was a major gas leak 
coming out of there and PD came to us and said that 
this building was going to blow up and we had to get 



10 

R. HIRTH 



everybody out of here, and at that point the school 
itself started filing out. So you had the large crowd 
from the North Terrace and then you had all the school 
emptying out. 

So rather than keep going, we decided to help 
PD, because there was only a few of them, to try and 
get the school and these people out. At some point 
across the street there was some gunfire and the people 
started running back towards us and we knew they 
couldn't go back that way, so we formed a wall on North 
Terrace and we were getting almost stampeded but trying 
to turn these people around to make them go back to 
West Street, West Side Highway, and go that way. When 
we finally accomplished that, myself, Grace and the 
police officers doing this, we were pretty confident 
that that building was going to blow and we probably 
were going to get killed at that point again, and it 
was hard to rationalize that we were going to stand 
there and wait to get blown up because people didn't 
want to listen. 

But we did that and we finally got everybody 
turned around and the building didn't blow, and then we 
went out to West Street and then we made our way up to 
a little further up West Street, and that's where we 



11 

R. HIRTH 



turned out of the crowd and went into a golf course 
where there was a -- next to the golf course there was 
a ferry dock. 

Do you want me to continue on that? 

Q. Sure. 

A. We were at the golf course. We tried to get 
our bearings together. I'm pretty sure both of us were 
pretty much in shock at that point and we tried to 
figure out what was going on. Then we left the golf 
course and we worked our way a little bit further west 
to where the ferry was and we directed people in how to 
get on the ferry or where the one ferry was docking, to 
get on and just go wherever it's going and get out of 
here because some people were a little hesitant. One 
woman wanted to go back to the Trade Center because she 
left something in the building and we tried to tell her 
it wasn't a good idea. We watched people get on the 
ferry, helped them on the ferries, and then we went 
into the shop where the guy that supposedly runs the 
ferry was there and he let us wash up and have a 
drink. I don't know how long we stayed in there, and 
that's when we decided do we keep going north or do we 
go back? We finally decided that we had to go back. 
We came out of that shack, we went back to 



12 
R. HIRTH 



the towers, as close as we could get, and at that point 
we realized that there was no one there, that anybody 
that was there was probably dead. There was no one. 
No one injured, there was no injuries, there was just 
devastation. There was nobody to help at that point. 
So we then left the Trade Center again. 

This whole time we were out of radio contact 
with anybody. The radios didn't work, the phones 
didn't work. So we had no communications. We had no 
idea what plans were being made. So we decided to head 
north again on the West Side Highway, and at some point 
we met up with Captain Stone and Richie Zarrillo. Once 
we met with them, they had a little more information 
than we had, that there was a staging area set up at 
Chelsea Piers, which I guess was another two miles down 
the road, but at that point, I don't know how many 
hours we were there at that point, but we were in no 
shape to walk to the Chelsea Piers. 

So we got a police van to turn around and 
take us. We lucked out because they were under a 
different direction, but I kind of like commandeered 
them and they took us to the Chelsea Piers. Again we 
refreshed ourselves, tried to get our thoughts together 
and tried to find out exactly what happened. 



13 
R. HIRTH 



Do you want me to continue with the whole 
thing? 

Q. That's good. 

A. Cut off there? 

Q. Yes. That covers the period that we're 
looking at . 

A. That's it. 

Q. Okay. Any thoughts or opinions? 

A. Thoughts or opinions. Well, my thoughts are 
that, which has been since this happened, that both 
myself and Lieutenant Cacciola along with probably a 
lot of other people will have a lot of trouble sleeping 
and stuff, but my thoughts and opinions are that we 
felt that we were very helpless back at the scene, a 
building the size of the World Trade Center falling 
down and you can't do nothing at that point but run, 
and it was very frustrating that there was no one else 
after the buildings went down that needed help. 
Everybody was gone and that was very frustrating. 

I don't know. That's it. We were convinced 
three different occasions inside of probably a two-hour 
period that we were going to die, once from the first 
building that we were in, then when the second 
collapse, then the gas leak. So it's a hard thing to 



14 
R. HIRTH 



try and do your job and kind of be pretty sure that you 
were not going to survive. I guess that really messed 
us up and knowing that we lost everybody that we lost 
in the Trade Center that we know that didn't come out 
and we know that they were in there and it was very 
frustrating that they were in there and there was 
nothing we could do about it. 

I guess there's nothing else to say. It's 
just that we were very frustrated that we couldn't do 
more than we did. I guess we were just happy to be 
alive, but it was a very frustrating experience. 

MR. RADENBERG: Okay. Thank you, chief. The 
time is now 0836. The interview is concluded. 



File No. 9110153 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

LIEUTENANT GRACE CACCIOLA 

Interview Date: October 24, 2001 



Transcribed by Elisabeth F. Nason 



G. CACCIOLA 

MR. RADENBERG: Today is October 24, 2001. 

The time is now 0727 hours. I'm Paul Radenberg of 

the Fire Department of the City of New York. 

Q. I'm conducting an interview with? 

A. Grace Cacciola, Lieutenant, Division 1. 

Q. This interview is being conducted at the 
Division 1 office and is regarding the events of the 
morning of September 11, 2001. 

A. I was at the bureau training. I was in 
refresher. We were on a break when Chief Hirth came in 
to me at approximately 8:50, between 8:50 and 8:55. He 
said he was just paged that a plane had hit the towers 
or one of the towers. We assumed it was a small plane; 
however, we did think there were going to be numerous 
patients, only because of the time of the morning and 
the usual rush hour traffic. He said he was going to 
call RCC and Citywide to get details, because we may be 
leaving, being that he was that Division commander. We 
may be leaving to go help out in Manhattan, to get my 
stuff ready. 

We went and made the phone calls. I went to 
the car, put everything in the car. PD SOD was 
chaotic. Citywide was starting with get very busy with 
air traffic. We got in the car, we called Citywide and 



G. CACCIOLA 

said they didn't need his response as of yet, but to 
stand by. Two seconds later, he said you know what, 
it's my borough, we will go in. 

As we are driving out the second tower was 
hit. We realized at that point this was no little 
accident. Got into Manhattan. I would say -- actually 
I didn't look at the history, 15 minutes. We parked by 
-- actually Roger Moore was in the car with us also. 
He came with us. He was in refresher with us. It was 
so it was Chief Hirth and myself and Lieutenant Roger 
Moore. We parked by the mouth of the Brooklyn Battery 
Tunnel. We got out of the car, first thing we saw was 
a severed torso, like 10 feet in front of us. There 
was a cop guarding the torso. 

As we were walking up to the command post, 
people were still jumping out of the towers. There 
were body parts and fragments and blood all over the 
place. Mass chaos. Both towers were still standing at 
this point. We went over to the command post and at 
the command post we saw Chief Gombo, Chief Kowalczyk, 
EMT Richie Zarrillo, Lieutenant Ross Terranova, Chief 
Ganci, Chief Sal Cassano, and then all aides, 
chauffeurs and what have you from the fire side. 

Chief Gombo asked Chief Hirth to respond to 



G. CACCIOLA 

the north side of the north tower. They were getting 
numerous calls for numerous patients on that side. We 
said okay, we were going. We told them we would leave 
Roger Moore with them at the command post because Roger 
has problems walking, with his knees. So we left Roger 
Moore at the command post. 

As we are walking, debris and people were 
still coming out of the towers so we were hugging the 
wall on West Street, but across the street from the 
towers, so we got -- I believe it was 2 Financial 
Plaza. I was very confused. It has to be 2 Financial 
Plaza when I look at this. I said to Chief Hirth, my 
cell phone had gone off, my family was frantic whether 
we were all right. He said how about we cut through 
the building. I said really fast just let me call home 
and tell them I'm all right, because my cell phone 
wasn't working. He said all right. That's a good 
idea. This way we were away from the debris. We can 
come out of 2 Financial Plaza up by Vesey Street. He 
says it will actually be safer so we aren't in any 
debris ' way. 

We walk in. Chief Hirth called his wife 
really quickly, told her we are here. It's chaos but 
we are safe. Don't worry about it. Then he handed me 



G. CACCIOLA 

the phone and I called my sister. As I was on the 
phone with my sister we heard the rumble. I screamed 
oh, my god and my sister thought I was dead, because 
she heard the rumble and the white cloud as the 
building came down, collapsed into -- again 2 Financial 
Plaza. We were chased with the white cloud. 

We started running and we had to stop at one 
point because now the whole area filled with black 
smoke and the Winter Garden atrium collapsed in front 
of us, because we were going to go into the Winter 
Garden to cut outside but we couldn't do it, because we 
had the collapse of the front of 2 Financial Plaza into 
us and then the atrium coming at us from the other 
side . 

We hit the ground, we just waited. In fact, 
I'm not sure -- we had a couple of cops with us, we had 
a couple of firemen. There was a female security guard 
from the building, and someone from maintenance, a 
male, from maintenance in the building. Somebody 
screamed we are just going to die here. Everybody just 
get on the floor. We got on the floor and it was pitch 
black and I believe it was Chief Hirth said we can't 
stay here. Then one of the firefighters screamed we 
are going to suffocate. We need to move now. 



G. CACCIOLA 

So we all held hands and we were climbing 
over the debris and I'm not sure, I think one of them 
had to have a little flashlight, because we really 
couldn't see where we were walking. Then the janitor 
had said I think the back is this way. If we walk this 
way we will find the back somewhere. 

So we walked, and again, time line is so 
hard. You don't know if it was 2 minutes, because when 
we got up you actually didn't know what was up, what 
was down, if you were actually on the floor, on the 
wall. We finally saw light that led us outside. Once 
outside, we started treating people because there were 
people hurt all over the place, covered in the white 
dust, coughing, cuts, so we started helping out people 
there . 

PD started screaming at us we need to move 
from here. We need to move. So we started funneling 
people with us that were hurt. There was a little 
trailer that they were using to fix the park, you know, 
they are fixing that whole area, that park. 
Q. Right. 

A. This was one of their facilities where -- 
their administrative trailer. So first they locked the 
door on us and PD ordered them to open the door. We 



G. CACCIOLA 

got inside. The people in there started cleaning us 
off and helping us. One of their workers came in 
totally covered in white soot. We took care of him, 
when, again, I think it was PD came screaming, we need 
to move from here. There is a threat of a gas line 
leak, I think they said at that point. 

So we started moving from there. We started 
funneling people with us that were hurt. We still had 
all the injured with us. Tower two collapsed. 

Everyone started running again. We started 
having people go toward Battery Park, you know, the 
pier, right down there by the ferry. We told everybody 
to start going there. So we are funneling people to 
run in that direction. 

When we got to Stuyvesant High School, PD is 
now screaming confirmed gas leak. They were letting 
the kids out of school, kids were all frantic. We 
helped them evacuate the school. Again we were 
funneling them on to West Street going north. Then 
there was a gun shot across the street and supposedly, 
this is just what we were hearing over the PD radio, 
somebody had shot out one of the windows and I think it 
was Manhattan Borough Community -- is that what is 
directly across the street? I'm so bad. Another 



G. CACCIOLA 

school across -- directly across the street. They had 
shot out one of the windows to open the door, to put 
people into there. So when the kids heard the gun 
shot, everybody started stampeding back towards us, so 
we had to calm them down and get them to start going 
north again. 

We got them going north. Once they were 
evacuated, we went back to the pier and started putting 
people on private ferries . Ferries were coming in and 
in fact, there was a little shed there with one of the 
ferry people and we asked him to start calling whoever 
he could on the phone to get more ferries here. He 
said he has been trying to do that but no one is 
answering the phone up north. We said you have to do 
whatever you can. Get on the radio. We need more 
ferries . 

Ferries started coming in. Again we started 
funneling people on to the ferries, telling them to go 
into Jersey City. We met a lot of resistance. A lot 
of people didn't want to leave Manhattan. That's like 
where are they going to take us. We were like, does it 
matter? You really need to get out of here right now. 

Everyone left on ferries, then we finally 
started to hear radio communications again, because we 



G. CACCIOLA 

had no radio communications that whole time. We met 
up, while we were walking, we met up with Richie 
Zarrillo again, and he says they want everybody to go 
to the Chelsea Piers. So we started walking towards 
the Chelsea Piers and then we met up with Captain Stone 
and EMT Gregg Brady and I think at one point it was 
Commissioner Gribbon. 
Q. Gribbon? 

A. Commissioner Gribbon, yes. We started 
walking towards the Chelsea Piers. Captain Stone was 
complaining he had trouble breathing at this time and 
shoulder pain, so when we made it up to the pier we had 
asked that he be transported to the hospital, so they 
gave us a command car. We actually took him to the 
hospital, dropped him off at Bellevue and went back to 
the site. 

When we went back to the site, we actually 
went back to Ground Zero. Chief McCracken was there 
and I saw Chief Peruggia and they were trying to 
formulate a plan for the on going events of that night 
into the following morning. 

They had asked us -- now it was like maybe 5 
p.m. at this point. 4 or 5 p.m. He had said he needed 
us to probably go home so this way we can be back by 4, 



10 



G. CACCIOLA 



5 a.m. the following morning. We said okay. Now in 
order to walk back, we had to go around to -- what's 
that street in Battery Park City, the first street. 

Q. South End? 

A. South End, yes. We had to go around to South 
End Avenue. While we were walking, they were removing 
Chief Ganci's body. Lieutenant Scullion was there. 
And we stood with him as they were removing Chief 
Ganci's body. They had just put him on the bus and now 
they were going to go remove Commissioner Feehan's 
body. They wanted him on the same bus. 

We walked with -- the bus drove around the 
corner and we followed the bus around the corner. When 
we got around the corner they said it was going to take 
a few minutes because he was still stuck in the hole. 
So they were trying to get him out. Father Delendic 
was there. Chief McFarland and I believe Captain 
Pineda . 

So while we were standing there, one of the 
firefighters from SOC came over and I thought he had 
said he had a bag and he said 



11 

G. CACCIOLA 



Then I think he sort of got a little upset by 
it and then John McFarland took it from him and then he 
placed it in the bus. It was going to be prolonged to 
get Commissioner Feehan out, so Chief Hirth said you 
know what, they told us to leave. Why don't we go back 
to the Battalion to make sure the rest of Manhattan is 
running and all the units are in place, because we have 
to come back early in the morning. 

We came back here. Chief Hirth spoke to the 
units downstairs and spoke to the units at Bellevue. 
Made sure everybody was all right and accounted for at 
that point. Then we came back the following morning 
and were assigned to the ferry terminal. 

Q. Okay. When you parked at the mouth of the 
Battery that was the Manhattan side? 

A. The Manhattan side. 

Q. How did you come up to the command post, do 
you remember? I know you said you walked, but do you 
remember what route you came? 

A. We were on -- are you considering this north 
and south or vice versa? 

Q. This is north. 



12 
G. CACCIOLA 



A. East and west. 

Q. South. West. 

A. Okay. We were on the east side of West 
Street, where -- up until -- we were by -- we passed 
the torso. That was like 10 feet in front of us. 
Debris was still falling and actually debris was 
actually reaching that far down. That's when Chief 
Hirth said let's get away from that side of the street 
and we crossed over and then we were on West Street, on 
the west side the whole time up. 

Q. Okay. Where was the command post? 

A. The command post was set up in the driveway, 
again, I believe, of 2 World Financial Plaza. Wasn't 
it somewhere along here? I'm really bad with maps and 
directions. That's why they don't let me drive. 

Q. Okay. 

A. There was a little ramp and that's where they 
had set up, right in front. 

Q. Then after the collapses you continued up? 

A. We stopped here at the command post. We got 
where we needed to go. We cut through here so we 
wouldn't have to walk on West Street. That's why we 
walked from here. We were going to come right out here 
to go to Vesey Street. While we were in here is when 



13 
G. CACCIOLA 



the first collapse occurred. 

Q. Okay. 

A. Then we cut out this way around the back. 

Q. Around the back. 

A. Then we went through the Winter Garden after 
it had collapsed, because we had to wait for all the 
glass to finish coming through. That was the only way 
out for us. We ended up outside on Vesey Street and 
West, but actually on Vesey. 

Q. Here? 

A. Right. Then we walked, I believe it had to 
be North End to Stuyvesant, because then we came up and 
around. 

Q. Where were you when the second building came 
down? 

A. When the second building came down we were, I 
believe on North and Vesey. Then we went back to 
-- that's when we walked to Stuyvesant. We were still 
funneling the people northbound, but we actually 
stopped them at Stuyvesant High School, then we went 
back into Battery Park by the piers . 

Q. Any opinions or comments? 

A. No. There was no way -- there is no way to 
ever critique or Monday morning quarterback what 



14 
G. CACCIOLA 



happened. There is no way, I feel, I personally feel, 
any of us could have been prepared for what happened. 
All the training in the world. I mean we could be 
going to the academy every single day. Nothing could 
have prepared us for what happened. 

Q. Right. Okay. I have two quick questions on 
names you gave. Richard Zarillo? 

A. Yes. 

Q. He is an EMT . Do you know where he is 
assigned? 

A. Operations . 

Q. Gregg Brady? 

A. September 11 he was assigned to Division 1. 
He was a Chief's aide. Currently he is at Battalion 4. 

Q. Okay. 

MR. RADENBERG: Okay. Thanks again. Have a 

good day. The time is now 0744. The interview is 

concluded. 



File No. 9110155 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

ROBERT BROWNE 

Interview Date: October 24, 2001 



Transcribed by Maureen McCormick 



MR. ECCLESTON: Today's date is October 24, 
2001. The time is 2140. I'm Christopher 
Eccleston of the New York City Fire Department, 
World Trade Center Task Force. I am conducting an 
interview with the following individual. 
Q. Please state your name, title and assigned 
command area. 

A. ROBERT BROWNE, deputy chief, Division 4. 

MR. ECCLESTON: Also present. 

MS. BASTEDENBECK: Christine Bastedenbeck of 
the New York City Fire Department World Trade 
Center Task Force. 

MR. ECCLESTON: Also present? 

MR. KIMBALL: Robert Kimball, EMT, chief's 
aide, Fire Department. 

Q. Chief Browne, were you working on the morning 
of September 11, 2001? 

A. Yes, I was working that morning. 
Q. Were you assigned to the World Trade Center 
disaster? 

A. Yes, I was. 

Q. Could you please in your own words tell me 
about the events of the day? 

A. I had logged on at eight o'clock in the 



ROBERT BROWNE 

morning, and I was enroute to the division office, and 
I got to approximately about 164th Street and the Grand 
Central Parkway when I heard the first radio reports 
there was possibly an incident going on at the World 
Trade Center. 

I made a quick phone call to the Division 4 
office and spoke to Sal Sangeniti and asked him what 
did it look like, you know, did he have anything more 
on it, and he said, "You better go. It sounds like 
it's a big one. " 

So I said all right, and I started heading 
into the job, and as I was -- naturally, as I was 
heading down the Grand Central Parkway, more and more 
information was coming in, and it sounded like it was 
very serious, and the reports from citywide radio were 
pretty chilling, and I knew that we would be going to 
work and having a busy day, so just trying to put my 
thoughts together, thinking back to '93 of what went on 
in '93 when I was there, and trying to get as much 
information as I could. 

I actually put on 1010 WINS on the radio in 
the car, trying to get more information, because a lot 
of the information was being drowned out on citywide 
with all the numerous units coming up and stuff, and I 



ROBERT BROWNE 

guess I made it down onto the FDR. I went over the 
Triborough, down the FDR Drive. The FDR Drive in spots 
was partially closed by police officers, and I started 
to make some good time, and I guess as I got around 
down by the U.N., they were reporting over the radio 
that a second plane had hit the second tower. 

Swung around west -- I swung around the 
battery, and I came up on West Street out of the tunnel 
from the east side, and there was an officer standing 
blocking my way, and he was --he was trying to direct 
me over out of the way because there was bodies 
scattered along West Street all the way back as far as 
the tunnel at that location, and I was in amazement. I 
couldn't believe it. 

I pulled up a little bit further onto -- by 
the Downtown Athletic Club on West Street there, and I 
pulled over, and I parked my car at that spot. 

Q. Can you indicate on the map where you parked 
your vehicle? 

A. Yeah. Probably -- let's see. Probably 
somewhere in this vicinity right here, down here. 

Q. Do you know what vehicle number that was? 

A. 792. 

Q. 792? 



ROBERT BROWNE 

A. Yeah. 

Q. Also chief, on that day, were you working 
with somebody? 

A. No, I was by myself. As a matter of fact, it 
was my first official tour as a deputy chief with the 
department, and I did not have an aide at that time. 

As I pulled up, I parked my car, grabbed my 
gear out of the car, and at that point, Chief 
Carasquillo and Sal Sangeniti had pulled up alongside 
of me with, I believe, Jason Katz, who was Billy Day's 
aide, and Billy was out, so I yelled over to Pete, 
would it be all right if I take Jason and keep Jason 
with me, and he said yeah, sure, no problem. 

And I reported to the command post at that 
point . 

Q. Where was the command post? 

A. The command post was located on West Street, 
basically almost right in between Tower 1 and Tower 2 
on the west side of the street over by the Winter 
Garden. That's where I -- when I got into the command 
post, Chief Gombo, and Chief Kowalczyk -- and Chief 
Kowalczyk appeared that he had just pulled up there 
himself, because he was just putting his coat. 

I reported in and I asked them what they 



ROBERT BROWNE 

needed of me, what assignment they had for me, and they 
told me they wanted me to go to Liberty and West Street 
and run the operation at the corner of Liberty and West 
Street. 

So with that I grabbed my aide, Jason, and we 
started heading back towards Liberty and West Street. 
We were walking back. We just left the command post. 
There was a lot of debris coming down off the building, 
and I turned around to Jason and I told Jason, "Make 
sure you have your chin strap on you your helmet. 
Don't just have it sitting on your head. Make sure you 
secure it to your head, " and with, that a large piece 
of debris was coming down, sailing off the building. I 
remember looking up watching, because I was afraid that 
we were going to get hit with something, and it had to 
be almost the size of a Volkswagen car, a sheet of 
metal almost the size of a Volkswagen car, and it 
was --it was burned. It was glowing red, and it just 
landed in the street in front of us, maybe 20 feet in 
front of us. 

I turned around to Jason and I said, "Look, 
man, you got to be real careful. This is bad." I 
said, something -- you know, so he said, "All right," 
and we headed off to West Street down to West and 



ROBERT BROWNE 

Liberty. I got to the corner of West and Liberty, and 
on the east side --on the east corner of West and 
Liberty, just underneath the foot bridge that crosses 
over, there were probably about three or four 
ambulances parked there, and all the personnel were out 
of their rigs with their equipment, but they were 
standing more towards the corner of -- they were more 
towards the Liberty Street side, just off of West, and 
they seemed to be like all in amazement. They were all 
standing there, staring up, looking at what was going 
on, and none of them had helmets on. 

A couple of them were Metro Care units. 
There was a voluntary unit there, one of our units, and 
we had units on the west side of Liberty, as well, 
standing there. Some of them had some gear on. Some 
of them had some helmets on, and I remember saying to 
Jason, "Jason, do me a favor. Let's take a piece of 
paper out, go over there, and identify who those people 
are. If they have helmets, make sure they get them 
on. If they don't have helmets, let me know." I said, 
"We need to get them out of here, you know, put them 
into an area that's back a way and little bit further." 

Timewise, I'm not real good with the time 
frame, but I might have been there maybe ten minutes, 



ROBERT BROWNE 

and I don't know if I heard it over the radio, or if I 
heard it over somebody else's radio, or if somebody 
else just yelled, and they said, "Watch out! The 
building's coming down." 

And with that, I can remember turning around, 
and I was standing right on the corner of West and 
Liberty, on the east corner of West and Liberty, and I 
can remember turning around and looking up at the 
building and seeing a very, very large section of the 
building just coming -- coming straight down at us with 
a sound like I have never heard before in my entire 
life, that it -- I had thought for a moment that 
another plane had come, that had hit the building. 
That's how loud the sound was. 

I remember turning to everybody and looking 
and just telling them to run. I told them all just 
run, run, and that's pretty much what happened. I 
mean, I got --it was basically a free-for-all, I 
think, at that point for everybody. 

I ran, and I could feel the -- I could feel 
the air changing behind me, and I just said to myself 
that I was going to -- that I was going to run as far 
as I could until I felt something either hit me and 
knock me down or until -- until it knocked me down. 



ROBERT BROWNE 

I probably got about 20 feet or so, because I 
thought I was going to be able to get pretty far, but I 
only managed to get from the corner of West and Liberty 
to underneath the foot bridge, which was probably maybe 
only about 20 or 30 feet. I don't even know if it's 
that far, and I got hit in the back of the head with a 
small object, which startled me a little bit, and then 
I got struck across my back with a larger object, which 
knocked me to the ground, and at that point, I said, 

"Well, I guess I'm just going to stay right here," and 
I can remember grabbing my chin strap and holding onto 
my chin strap on my helmet, and just hoping that it 
didn't come off. I was afraid I was going to have a 
head trauma or something. I didn't want to wind up a 
vegetable after this thing, and I can remember praying, 
asking Him not to take me, and if He was going to take 
me, please make it fast. 

At that point, it was like --it got totally 
pitch black. I couldn't see anything. I couldn't 
breathe. There was a wave that was -- I don't know if 
you're a beach person, but if you're a beach person and 
you ever been in the ocean, and you have a large wave 
come over you, and you can just feel it keep coming and 
coming. It's like the debris just kept coming and 



10 

ROBERT BROWNE 



piling up and piling up, and when it finally did stop, 
I wasn't sure if I was alive or if I was dead. 

It was pitch black. I had something very 
heavy across my back. I had something across my legs, 
because I remember trying to move my legs, because I 
was stuck under whatever, this debris, and I wasn't 
able to move. 

I can remember reaching for my radio and 
calling out a Mayday for the corner of Liberty and 
West, and nobody answered. There was no answer. It 
was just dead quiet, and I just assumed at that point 
that everybody was gone, and I wasn't -- I couldn't -- 
you know, I didn't call out any more. 

Then as the thick black, black smoke and 
blackness around me started to clear a little bit, and 
it started to get a little bit grayer, kind of like got 
to a dark gray, and then it got like a lighter gray, I 
could hear -- as it started to get lighter, I could 
hear people from the distance yelling for help. I 
could hear people saying, "Help me, I'm over here," or 
"Help me, I'm over there," and I started doing the 
same thing. 

I started calling out for help because I was 
unable to free myself from where I was, and I called 



11 

ROBERT BROWNE 



out several times, and then finally I heard somebody 
answer, and they said, "Relax. We can see you. We're 
going to get you. Just take it easy. Just stay where 
you are." 

And probably a couple of minutes later they 
got some of this debris off me, and they managed to get 
whatever it was that was on my back -- I believe it was 
a chunk of concrete or -- I don't know what exactly, a 
piece of metal. I'm not sure even sure exactly what it 
was that was on my back, and I had a large piece of 
metal across my legs. That's why I couldn't move my 
legs, but these two guys that got me out were like 
amazing. I couldn't believe it. 

It was a guy from a react team and a Hatzolah 
paramedic, and when I got up from the pile, I guess I 
kind of just dusted myself off a little bit and tried 
to regain my composure, and I started looking for 
Jason, who had been with me, my aide, and I couldn't 
find him, and I assisted this paramedic from Hatzolah 
and the react guy in removing a couple of other people 
that were trapped in some debris out of that, and then 
all of a sudden Jason appeared, and he was hurt. His 
hand was hurt. He was a mess, and we sat him down. 

I was trying to find Chief Wells. I had just 



12 
ROBERT BROWNE 



prior to -- two minutes before the building going down, 
I had had a conversation with Chief Wells, and he had 
told me that he was going into the building with 18 
Charlie, and he was much closer towards the tower than 
I was, and I was unable to find him. 

Q. You need to take a break? 

A. No, I'm all right. 

Q. If you do, it's fine. 

A. No, I'm okay. 

So we tried to gather up as many people from 
that area as I possibly could, tried to put some sort 
of semblance of a team back together to see what we 
could do at that point, and I can remember Chief Wells 
coming up out of the middle of the pile over on -- over 
close towards the tower, and it was like I was just so 
relieved to see him at that point, you know, a special 
place in my heart. Charlie and I are good friends. It 
was devastating to think that he was gone at that 
point . 

So we gathered up, started to take care of 
some of the people that were injured. We collected the 
people, and we kept them underneath that foot bridge 
there on the very west section by the World Financial 
Center there, and we bandaged up a few people, tried to 



13 
ROBERT BROWNE 



get them together. There was no radio contact. 

I didn't know where anybody else was, and 
then I don't know how much time actually transpired 
between the time that we took care of some of our 
members that were injured, and the next thing I know, 
the north tower collapsed, and again, that horrible 
sound, and we all just ran. We all ran again. 

I didn't want to take my chance out on the 
street again that time. The financial center was 
there. A large window on the ground floor had been 
blown out from the first collapse. I was able to jump 
through that window with Jason and Chief Wells, and I 
didn't know if I should go completely through the 
building or if I should stay in there and whatever. 
Like I said, it was a coin toss. 

I went in the building. I ran to the left as 
I entered the building. I found a bakery that was 
there. At that point, I lost Jason, because I think 
Jason went straight through. He ran straight through 
the building. I lost Chief Wells. 

I ran into the bakery, and when I got into 
the bakery, there was a back room. I ran behind the 
counter and went to the back room, and there were two 
large freezers in there, and I went in there and I 



14 
ROBERT BROWNE 



knelt -- I knelt in the corner facing the freezer as 
the debris was hitting the building, and the windows 
blew out in the place, and all that -- all over again. 
Relived the whole thing over again, with all that 
black, thick, choking smoke, unable to see, the fear 
that -- whether or not that building was going to hold 
up, and, again, I don't know how long I was in there, 
but I was in there with -- there were three other 
gentlemen in the room with me when it started to 
clear. One guy was a photographer for the Daily News. 
The other guy was a transit worker or something, and I 
think the other guy was just a regular Joe, just a 
civilian who followed us, you know. 

I hope he didn't follow me because I thought 
I knew where I was going, because he'd be shit out of 
luck if he did, but we all stayed in there. 

I can remember it starting to clear a little 
bit once again, checked with them to make sure that -- 
checked with them to make sure that they were all all 
right, and I remember telling them, "Come on guys. We 
got to get out of here. I don't know if this building 
is going to hold up, " because so much debris hit the 
building, I didn't know what kind of shape it was in, 
and I certainly didn't want to get caught in there, 



15 
ROBERT BROWNE 



because nobody would have known we were ever in there. 
We could have been in there forever. 

So we tried to make it out on the -- tried to 
exit out of the West side of the building to South End 
Avenue, and there was a whole bunch of debris blocking 
the doorway for our exit out, so the four of us stood 
there and grappled through the debris enough so we 
could climb up over some of the stuff and exit out onto 
the avenue. 

When I got out onto south end avenue, there 
was an ambulance sitting right there, perfect shape, no 
problem. It was running. I said, oh, troops. 
Somebody else is here. That's so good, and I went 
running up to the truck, and naturally it was locked, 
just running, sitting there, but I was -- I was pretty 
stunned at that point, and I think that's the first 
time when I heard what appeared to be or what I thought 
in my mind was that we were going to be bombed, because 
I heard a fighter jet overhead, and when I heard the 
fighter jet overhead, Jason had come out of a store 
across the street on South End Avenue, and we looked at 
each other, and I said, "You all right?" He said, 
"Yeah, I'm okay. I can keep going." 

I said, "Okay, good. Come on, we got to get 



16 
ROBERT BROWNE 



away from here." I said, "I don't know what's going on 
yet." I said, "We got to get away from here. I have 
no communication with anybody." I said, "Let's just 
move away from here." 

So I gathered anybody that was on the street 
there at that point, because people were starting to 
straggle out of the stores and stuff, and I told them, 
"Come on. You got to keep moving, keep moving." And 
I made it to the -- again, I heard that jet and I 
thought we were going to be bombed, and I started to 
run, and there was a cop that appeared on the corner, 
and he says, "Don't run. It's one every ours." He 
says, "It's one of ours. Don't worry." 

And that was quite a -- quite a moment of 
relief, knowing that it wasn't, you know, whoever had 
done this horrible thing to us, that they weren't now 
going to just be bombing us. 

I got to the corner of Albany and South End, 
and I encountered four firefighters carrying a 
firefighter with Commissioner Gregory and Dr. Kelly, 
and they needed an ambulance, and I looked down -- I 
looked down the block at the river promenade that runs 
along the Hudson River on Albany Street, and there were 
four ambulances down there, so Jason ran down there, 



17 
ROBERT BROWNE 



got one of the ambulances, brought it back up. 

We loaded the firefighter in the ambulance, 
and they took him off to the hospital. So with those 
three ambulances that were down there, I said, "Come 
on, let's go down to the water." And Commissioner 
Gregory had mentioned that the fire boat was going to 
be coming up to that location, so I went down there, 
and there were probably five or six, seven EMS 
personnel. I couldn't tell you who they are, what the 
names were, who they worked for, but they were there, 
and I think one crew was from Flushing Hospital, and 
there were hundreds and hundreds of people just running 
down that promenade. 

All kinds of boats were pulling up. The fire 
boat had pulled up and docked. Several other boats -- 
a police boat. There was a tug boat there. There were 
civilian boats pulling up, willing just to take people, 
hand them off over onto the boat, and they were going 
to take them off on over to Jersey for us. 

I got together the crews there, and we kind 
of put a little makeshift triage area together, and we 
would evaluate people before we put them on the boat to 
see which ones -- because we wanted to put all the 
noninjured people on one boat, and we wanted to put the 



18 
ROBERT BROWNE 



injured people on another boat, and, again, I can't 
tell you how long I operated at that location. It must 
have been an hour and a half, maybe two hours. I'm not 
even sure. But we loaded hundreds and hundreds of 
people onto those boats that were there. 

At one point Charlie Wells just appeared 
again out of the blue, and it was a great moment. I 
was so happy to see him, because I had lost him in the 
second collapse again. I remember we hugged each 
other, and we said, you know, to each other, "You all 
right? You all right?" And he said "Yeah, " and he 
says, "I'm going back. I'm going to do some stuff. 
You stay here, do what you got to do," and he took off. 

Probably about 15 or 20 minutes later, Chief 
Villani walked up the promenade and told me that they 
were setting up a major area down at the Staten Island 
Ferry Terminal, and that I should make my way down 
there with whatever resources that I had, so that's 
what we did. 

We gathered up the people that I could 
gather. We confiscated one of these little golf carts 
that somebody was using up and down the promenade. We 
took that from them, and I loaded all these people on 
that, and we started heading down towards the Staten 



19 
ROBERT BROWNE 



Island Ferry Terminal. 

I got probably about two blocks away, and I 
encountered a paramedic from Battalion 57 -- I don't 
know the kid's name -- running in the opposite 
direction that we were going, towards us, and he was 
screaming at the top of his lungs. He was in a panic, 
and he was yelling, "There's a gas leak! There's a gas 
leak! There's going to be an explosion. You have to 
get out of here. You have to get out of here." 

And he was really --he was wild. He was 
real wild, and I jumped off the cart, because he ran 
right by me, and I jumped off the cart, and I chased 
him down, and I grabbed him, and I put him against the 
wall, and I kind of shook him, and I told him, "Look, 
relax. You're going to be okay. Everything is fine." 

I told him who I was. I said, "Come on, 
you're coming with me," and he was like in this panic, 
and I told him again, "You're going to be fine. You're 
coming with us. You're going to be okay," and I 
convinced him. He calmed down a little bit. He was 
shaken. He started crying. 

I put him on the cart, and we headed down. 
We got around the vicinity of the North Cove Marina, 
and they were doing major evacuations into Jersey out 



20 
ROBERT BROWNE 



of the North Cove Marina, and there was a police 
lieutenant and a police sergeant standing in the middle 
of the roadway, not allowing anybody to proceed past 
there, because he said there is a gas leak or there is 
a report of a gas leak. He says everybody has to 
evacuate lower Manhattan. 

So at that point, we got on a police launch 
and went to Jersey. As I hopped on the police launch, 
this buddy of mine that I fish with all the time, who 
works for harbor, he said, "Are you all right? Is 
Chief McCracken okay? You know, what's the deal? Did 
everybody make it from Rockaway?" I said, "Look, I 
don't know." I said, "I couldn't tell you anything," 
and we made it over to the dock in Jersey in a matter 
of minutes, maybe five minutes or so. Scooted us right 
over there. 

I got off the launch. One of the EMTs that 
was rushing with us from Flushing Hospital, she started 
having like an asthma attack or something. She was 
having some sort of reaction. I don't know what it 
was, and I made sure that all of them stayed there and 
went up to the medical treatment area up there to get 
seen . 

At that point, I turned around with Jason. I 



21 
ROBERT BROWNE 



said, "Jason, I got to go back. I can't stay here." I 
said, "I can't stay here and just receive victims 
here." I said "I need to go back." 

Jason said, "Okay, I'm going with you." He 
says, "I'm still all right," and I yelled to my buddy, 
and he told me -- he says, "I'll be back in five 
minutes." He said, "I'll take you back with me next 
trip." 

And in the interim, another police boat 
pulled in, and when the police boat was getting ready 
to pull out, I just hopped on that boat and got back, 
and I made it down to -- I got back into the North Cove 
Marina, and I made it down into the spot in Battery 
Park where the Indian Museum is. It's right by the 
launch for the Liberty Island thing, and there was 
probably maybe five or six ambulances parked there, and 
Chief Mark Stefans was there in charge of that 
operation. He was told to go there, and that's where 
he was, and he had several EMTs there. 

They weren't seeing any patients. It was 
that same frustration that I think that everybody felt 
that whole time after the first initial patients prior 
to the building going down. Everybody was just kind of 
just standing around in wonderment, wondering where are 



22 
ROBERT BROWNE 



all the victims, and he was there, and they took care 
of me there. 

I was having a lot of trouble with my eyes. 
I couldn't see really well. I could hardly open my 
eyes at that point from all the stuff that was in my 
eyes, and I don't really think that I was feeling 
anything yet as far as injuries or anything like that, 
because I was kind of just running on adrenaline, and 
all I could remember was that I wanted to call home to 
let them know I was alive. I was unable to get out. I 
couldn't reach anybody. 

I probably stayed there with Mark Stefans 
probably about 25 or 30 minutes. Again, I don't know. 
It could have been and hour and a half, it could have 
been two hours. My time line is horrible. I'm sorry, 
but we were there for awhile, and I turned around to 
Mark and I said, "Mark, we're not doing anything 
here." I said, "Everybody is just, you know, maybe a 
half a mile away at the Staten Island Ferry Terminal. 
Maybe that is where we should take all these 
resources. Let's pack them up. Let's go down there, 
and we'll shut this thing down and go down here. We 
are not seeing anybody here." 

So that was what we did. We talked about it 



23 
ROBERT BROWNE 



and he decided yeah, okay, we'll do that, and we got 
everybody together, packed up all our stuff, got the 
ambulances and all, and sent them down there, and Chief 
Stefans and I walked from that location down to the 
Staten Island Ferry Terminal, and as I walked into the 
Staten Island Ferry Terminal, I guess I had reached my 
point where I could probably no longer function, and I 
walked in, and I can remember seeing Dr. Richman's 
face, and Dr. Richman took one look at me, and he says, 
"Bobby," he says, "You got to lie down." So I said, 
"I'm all right. I'm all right." 

He says, "No, you're done. You are not 
working any more." He said, "Lie down. Let us take 
care of your eyes." He says -- you know, and that's 
when I tried to lay down, I couldn't lay down. I 
realized that my back was injured, that I had something 
wrong with my back, and I couldn't lay down at that 
point, and they flushed my eyes. They took some vital 
signs, and the next thing I know, I was getting in the 
back of an ambulance and going off to the hospital, and 
I believe I went to the hospital sometime in the 
vicinity around three o'clock or 3:30 in the afternoon, 
so, again, my time -- what areas where I thought I was 
only for like 15, 20 minutes, it could have been a lot 



24 
ROBERT BROWNE 



longer, and so somewhere along there all that time 
transpired, but that's pretty much my story of that 
day. 

Q. Is there anything else you'd like to add to 
this interview? Anything at all? 

A. No. 

MR. ECCLESTON: This interview is concluded 

at 2212 hours. 



File No. 9110156 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

EMT DAVID TIMOTHY 

Interview Date: October 25, 2001 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



D. TIMOTHY 

MR. RADENBERG: Today is October 25th, 
2001. I'm Paul Radenberg of the Fire 
Department, City of New York. The time is 
now 0648 hours. I am conducting an 
interview with -- 

EMT TIMOTHY: EMT David Timothy. 
MR. RADENBERG: Of EMS Battalion 4. 
This interview is being conducted at EMS 
Battalion 4 regarding the events of the 
morning of September 11th, 2001. 
Q. David? 

A. Well, I guess at approximately 8:48 
when everything started my partner and I were 
sitting on I believe that was Madison and Henry 
Street, if I'm not mistaken. No, Catherine and 
Henry, which is about a block away from our 89, 
our unit's 04 Boy. 

What happened was a civilian had 
approached -- in fact, let me just start that 
over. A transmission came over the air about 
something hitting or some sort of explosion in 
the World Trade Center. Secondly, a civilian 
walked up to our ambulance and said, "I don't 
know if you guys heard about I, but they're 



D. TIMOTHY 3 

bombing the World Trade Center." 

Okay. We decided, all right, let's 
just take a slow ride over there and see what's 
going on. As soon as we started moving off and 
we had the Trade Center in view, my partner of 
course made some expletives and he got on the air 
and said he saw what happened right now, put us 
on the assignment. 

I guess after that it probably took us 
a few minutes to get over there from our 
location. Basically it's quick to get around 
Manhattan from where we were. 

We got there and we were --we took a 
route down Fulton Street and ended up behind at 
one point 01 Charlie, directly behind them. Not 
to block the street because there were other 
engine companies coming in, we pulled up in front 
of them. I would say we were between Fulton and 
Dey on Church. 

Of course at this time the south tower 
was engulfed in flames. There was debris 
everywhere. People were running out of the 
buildings. I guess people started coming towards 
us asking for help. A lot of people were 



D. TIMOTHY 4 

directing them to just get away from the 
buildings if they can. 

There was one individual, he had glass 
all over him. He said he just got thrown through 
some glass. We put him on our ambulance, and we 
continued to try to get like a few people as well 
in the ambulance. 

The next thing I heard was a loud like 
an engine roar. I looked up, and the next thing 
I knew I just saw -- I don't know if it was the 
tail end of the plane or what, but I saw 
something. When I looked up, I heard "boom." 
I'm sorry, the north tower was the first one. 
The south tower then got hit when we were right 
there. 

My partner was actually trying to put 
someone in the ambulance at the time. I grabbed 
him and kind of like pushed him in and closed the 
doors, and I like ran back up Fulton into a 
little bit of like I guess a cul-de-sac. It was 
a big garage door. There was a bunch of people 
in there. I ran back towards the ambulance, and 
I moved the ambulance around to Fulton and 
Broadway. 



D. TIMOTHY 5 

My partner instructed me, he said, 
"Listen, let's just get these people to the 
hospital, you know, Beekman." We went to Beekman 
Hospital. Actually we went up to Dey and back 
onto Fulton and Broadway and went to Beekman 
Hospital. 

There was probably about five or six 
people. We dropped them off. There was one guy 
with a broken ankle. This one guy was having an 
asthma attack right then and there. The guy -- 
we actually long-boarded him. There were like 
two other civilians. Really I can't remember 
what was the extent of the injuries. So we took 
them to the hospital. We left. 

Now, when the explosion hit I don't 
know if -- it actually took me off my feet, 
because I fell. I actually got cuts and stuff 
like that all over my hands and whatnot. My 
partner, he wanted to take me off service. I was 
like, "No, no, no, I've got to help someone. 
Let's just do what we've got to do and get back 
and try to give them some assistance." 

We took him back and for some reason I 
kept hearing on the radio something about a 



D. TIMOTHY 6 

staging area at Vesey and West. It was so 
blocked up, you couldn't really travel around it. 
So we ended being back at the same location that 
we were before, which was Fulton and Church, of 
course once again still parked in front of 01 
Charlie's unit. 

Lieutenant Melarango, he came up to me 
and he basically said don't move the bus. Leave 
the bus where it is. Just before that actually 
Lieutenant Medjuck had instructed the same thing. 
He said don't move the bus whatever. 

The next instructions from him were 
whatever you do don't leave. What we're going to 
do is give you -- I can't remember if he said six 
or eight, whatever, like six patients. The next 
instructions were to take these people to 
Brooklyn, take them as far into Brooklyn as you 
can, go as far as into Kings County. I said, 
"All right. Not a problem." 

So more or less now it was more like a 
stand and really wait kind of a show. At this 
time both towers of course are engulfed in 
flames. This is when to me the worst of it 
really started beginning. Now you see the people 



D. TIMOTHY 7 

jumping out of the buildings. There are body 
parts everywhere. It just was a mess. 

So my partner and I were just waiting 
there. I think we just started to get the first 
of the few people, and now I'm like wondering, 
all right, what am I supposed to do? I'm 
driving, so I guess I'm going to have to wait. 

So my partner now -- I think he's just 
getting one person on board and just started 
hearing I guess like -- to me it sounded like the 
8:45 from Jamaica station going to Atlantic -- to 
Flatbush Avenue, the Long Island Railroad, just 
some big train just right over your head, like a 
whole bunch of locomotives just running right 
over your head. 

I looked up, and the building just 
tilted and started coming down. All I could say 
was run. That's the only thing I could remember 
from them is just saying run. I could have sworn 
my partner was behind me, and I'm running. 

I'm running actually down north on 
Church and made like a quick right on Vesey where 
the Stage Deli is I guess right here. To me it 
looked like it was open. I ran straight to it, 



D. TIMOTHY 8 

and it was locked. 

At this time it just got totally black. 
All I could do is think of right then and there 
was just to crouch and just try to get shelter, 
because things are hitting me. Something started 
hitting me in my back. 

There was a whole bunch of people in 
front of me, and everybody's like -- I don't 
know. I guess the last person they saw was me, 
and people are like, "What are we going to do? 
What are we going to do?" 

Out of nowhere this person grabs my 
shoulder and happened to be a cop. I said, "Have 
you got anything heavy on you like your night 
stick or something?" I grabbed him and threw him 
right in front of me. I said, "There is glass 
right in front of you. Start breaking it, 
because that's the only way we can get shelter." 

So he started breaking the glass, and 
we went in. I instructed everybody to get in 
there. People were coughing, respiratory 
problems, whatever the case may be. I started 
telling everybody, "Listen, there's water. I'm 
sorry, but just start cleaning your face off, 



D. TIMOTHY 9 

wash your mouth off." Guys were coming in with 
irritated eyes. I said, "Wash your eyes out." 
It's a deli, so there are sinks and everything. 
I said, "Wash your face off, whatever." 

The cop was like, "Where do we go from 
here?" I said, "If anybody comes in here that 
can walk, let them get as far away as possible." 
It was so weird. 

A woman actually came up to me and 
asked me how to get uptown. I mean, basically 
she wanted to know if that train station, the A 
train, which was I guess Fulton Street train 
station, if she should take it to go uptown. I 
didn't even know -- I said, "Ma'am, I don't even 
know what to tell you, to be honest with you. I 
don't know what to tell you." I said, "I don't 
even know if they're running." 

After that we probably stayed -- time, 
don't even ask me time. I don't even know what 
time it is by this time. If I had to make an 
estimate, we probably stayed there probably a 
half hour, if that much, after the first building 
collapsed . 

Let's see, the first building 



D. TIMOTHY 10 

collapsed -- the first one collapsed, oh, 9:55? 
Wow. We probably stayed there like not even a 
half hour, probably like 15, 20 minutes, until 
all the smoke cleared a little bit. 

Then I walked back outside and I 
started looking for my partner. At this time the 
deli is cleared out. I started looking for my 
partner and couldn't find him. The first person 
I bumped into was Alex Lousky. I always remember 
that. He said he couldn't even find his partner. 
I told him I saw James right behind me. I said, 
"Have you seen him?" He's like, "No." All 
right . 

Now, the thing was I didn't even know 
where my ambulance was at this point. Even 
though they said it was still there, I didn't 
even think about checking. 

Now, at this time I started walking 
back on Church going south, and I got back to 
Fulton Street. There was a bunch of rubble and 
stuff right around here. This building was -- I 
don't even want to talk about that building. You 
couldn't really see much down this way anyway. 
But I walked here and I walked back up Fulton 



D. TIMOTHY 11 

Street. This is where I saw Alex, right around 
in the middle of Fulton. 

Q. Okay, between Church and Broadway. 
A. Right. 

I walked back up Fulton Street, and I 
saw Jay right in front of -- I guess this is The 
Chase Manhattan Bank right here on the corner. 
Of course I gave him the biggest hug I could ever 
think of. I just asked him, "Are you okay?" He 
said, "Yeah, I'm --" He asked me the same thing. 

He said, "Listen, the bank told us we 
could come inside and we could start bringing 
people in. We were in there, and of course 
everybody else was like just in a daze. There 
were people in the bank, there were people 
crying. The one thing that was kind of great is 
that people actually had access to phones. 

I think what happened is at this time I 
lost -- I couldn't even find my radio. Jay had 
his. So I got on the radio and said, "04 Boy, 
all present and accounted for. Where is 
staging?" He gave us two locations. The one 
that was closest was the South Ferry. 

Jay said, "Look, let's just stick 



D. TIMOTHY 12 

around here for a while, see what we can do. 
Let's just not leave just yet. Probably more 
people can come in." At this time I think I 
walked back out. If I'm not mistaken, I walked 
back out of the bank and I saw one or two 
lieutenants and one other guy. I think they were 
walking in the direction of Fulton Street. 

The next thing I knew, I'm standing 
outside and this woman asked me, "Where do I go? 
Where do I go?" I said, "Usually you get as far 
away as possible from here or you go inside the 
bank and just try to compose yourself, because I 
don't know what to tell you right about now. 
It's not like -- I'm not saying I don't want to 
tell you something. It's like if I tell you go 
north and something happens up north, I don't 
want to tell you --" 

Q. Right. 

A. So I just told her, "Listen, get as far 
away from the area right now." The next thing I 
knew, you started hearing more explosions. I 
guess this is when the second tower started 
coming down. 

This time I was like, you know what, 



D. TIMOTHY 13 

what else? What else? I almost thought I had 
died the first time. I thought, what else is 
there? I walked back in the building and said, 
"Jay, the second tower is coming down." He said, 
"What?" He said, "Everybody just get down on the 
floor and just get behind something." 

The same thing happened to the second 
tower. I'm looking from the window, just coming 
down. It was like, well, oh, well. I'm like, 
why am I standing in front of this glass, because 
there's glass right in front of me. I'm like, am 
I nuts? So I just walked away I crouched down 
behind a desk. 

The one thing I did is a looked behind 
me, and the revolving door was spinning. From 
the force of the wind it just started turning. 
Of course it just got pitch-black again. What 
can you do? You sit there and wait it out. 

It says here I guess the north tower 
collapsed at 10:29. So we started off --we had 
an elderly Jewish man. From the time he got 
there, he was on a stair chair. We had water and 
stuff like that, so we were giving him water to 
drink and telling him to try to relax. People 



D. TIMOTHY 14 

were calling loved ones. 

We got an ambulance, and we took the 
old man to the ambulance. We asked if anyone 
else wanted to go to the hospital. We told them, 
"Listen, if you're not going to the hospital, you 
can't stay in the bank. Get as far away from 
here as possible. Start heading towards the 
bridge. Do whatever you've got to do just to get 
away from the area." 

All right. So I said, "Jay, listen, of 
course the other location is up by Chelsea Piers. 
We can't go up there." We're on foot. For some 
reason I think one of the guys had found a ESL) 
tech bag, a really big one, and they brought that 
in. We started trying to see the inventory to 
see what we had. Let's just grab it and let's 
just start heading out to the South Ferry. 

We grabbed the stuff. I took the bag 
on my back, started heading down Broadway, and 
walked to the South Ferry. And that was it, at 
least for us. 

Q. What's your partner's last name? 
A. Zion . 
Q. Zion? 



D. TIMOTHY 15 

A. Yeah. He actually quit. 

Q. Yeah, I heard that. 

The ambulance that took the man from 
the bank, was that a fire ambulance? Do you know 
who it was? 

A. No. I have a feeling it was a Brooklyn 
ambulance, because the unit that drove it, I 
don't know if they're from Manhattan it could 
have been Brooklyn or whatever else. I don't 
know. Then again, it could be all the way 
uptown. I don't know. I only know the guys from 
Queens and this Batallion, 4. 

Q. After you lost your partner with the 
first collapse, were you with any other ambulance 
people? 

A. Yeah. I was standing with one of the 
lieutenants, I think it was Medjuck, at one 
point. You know what, I really can't truly 
remember, but I knew I saw someone with a blue 
shirt, a light blue shirt, that is. 

We didn't really lose each other 
because, you know what, because I knew exactly 
where he was when the first tower collapsed. Oh, 
I'm sorry, no. I'm thinking about the first 



D. TIMOTHY 16 

plane crash --or the second plane crash. 

When the first building collapsed, no, 
I wasn't with any lieutenants at all. I didn't 
see any lieutenants. I only saw lieutenants 
after I found him. 

Q. After you found Jay? 

A. Yeah. 

Q. At the bank? 

A. Yeah. I think there was Melarango and 
someone else. I knew it was one and one. Then 
one EMT was with him. It was a group of people, 
and they were heading down Fulton Street, if I'm 
not mistaken, back towards the Battery. 

That's all I can remember. A lot of 
that day is just like a big blur, believe it or 
not. I mean, I did what I had to do. I tried to 
keep that much composure. But when you try to 
formulate a time line, the only thing you can 
remember is like the events. You don't remember 
like at 9:56 -- 

Q. Right, yeah. 

A. As far as I'm concerned, time just 
stood still for a long while. It was 
interesting . 



D. TIMOTHY 17 

Q. Any thoughts or comments on the day? 

A. Let's just hope it doesn't happen 
again . 

Q. I agree with you on that one. 

A. I can't think of anything else. 

5:25, I didn't know that was the time 
it fell, Seven World Trade. 

Q. Yeah, it was later in the afternoon. 

A. Like I said, that's as much as I 
remember. It was bad. 

MR. RADENBERG: Okay. The time is now 

0708 hours, and the interview is concluded 



File No. 9110157 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

EMT RICHARD BRODERICK 

Interview Date: October 25, 2001 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



R. BRODERICK 2 

MR. TAMBASCO: Today is October 25th. 
The time is 6:52 a.m. my name is Mike 
Tambasco with the World Trade Center Task 
Force. We're conducting an interview into 
the events of September 11th at the World 
Trade Center. Our interview today is 
with -- 

EMT BRODERICK: Richard Broderick, 
emergency medical technician, Battalion 10, 
Manhattan . 

A. I responded to the World Trade Center. 
We were at St. Luke's Hospital when we heard it 
go down. The police officers were with us. We 
heard it go over their radio as a level 3, which 
I didn't understand what a level 3 was, but they 
said that it was a plane into the towers but they 
didn't know what type of plane. 

So we took our patient to St. Luke's 
Hospital, and my partner came out and said we 
were going to the World Trade. I said, okay, 
fine. So we started to head down the West Side 
Highway, and the more we approached the scene, 
the scenario, we saw the towers and we saw the 
smoke bellowing out of the first tower. It was 



R. BRODERICK 3 

pretty scary. 

When we pulled in, we pulled in to West 
Street and Vesey, which is supposedly the staging 
area for EMS units and other emergency vehicles. 
I saw Mayor Giuliani walk in front of us, and I 
assumed that was before he got trapped in the 
Trade Center himself in the bunker. 

So they told us to go up the street, 
which I think is Vesey. I pulled into the spot, 
and the next thing I know, there was a third 
emergency medical technician who came running 
over to us and said he was from Queens General. 
He took the train up. He said he worked -- his 
name was Santiago. I don't know his first name. 
Spanish kid, young kid, very nice kid. 

The next thing you know, they were 
handing us five burn victims. I don't know what 
they looked like because I was still in the 
driver's seat. I didn't even put the thing in 
park. My partner said, "We've got five burn 
victims. We're going to Bellevue Hospital." I 
said, "Okay, fine." 

We pulled out, and I swung around -- I 
don't know the street, but I swung around the 



R. BRODERICK 4 

block. The next thing, I was back on West 
Street. When I was coming my partner yelled -- 
can I curse? 

Q. Do whatever you want. 

A. He said, "Oh, shit." I said, "What's 
the matter?" I looked in the mirror and all I 
saw was clouds, dust. I put my foot down on the 
pedal. When you're driving, you're like with 
your foot all the way down and you're still 
trying to push the vehicle to get it going 
because you think you're not moving. 

I just took off. I flew up West Street 
all the way up to 34th. From then on -- we got 
to Bellevue, and we disembarked the patients. I 
didn't even get out of the vehicle again either. 
The doctors and the nurses were all there. 

Q. They were grabbing them out of the bus? 

A. They were just grabbing them out of the 
vehicle with my partner and the young guy that 
was with us. They told me to get out of the 
emergency room bay. As I swung out of the bay, 
the next thing I know my partner is coming 
running back with a stretcher and everything and 
he's telling me, "We're going back down. We're 



R. BRODERICK 5 

going back down." 

We flew down to the FDR Drive, and I 
got off at Pearl Street. We came up the ramp 
right by One Police Plaza. I couldn't believe 
the scenery. It was like -- I don't know how to 
explain it. People were just full of dust. It 
was like snow. It was all over the place. 

People were in a daze. They were 
just -- they looked like zombies. The word was 
zombies. They were walking. They were confused. 
I had to go really slow through the streets or I 
would hit them. You couldn't see anything anyway 
it was so full of dust. 

We wound up going down -- I don't know 
what the streets were, to be honest with you. I 
remember passing the Federal Reserve Bank. 

Q. Maiden Lane is the Federal Reserve. 
A. Because I happened to see the marshals 
and everybody out with the shot guns and machine 
guns. I noticed the area right away. The next 
thing, we saw an ambulance flying. So my partner 
said, "Follow them." It was a private ambulance. 
It wasn't an EMS unit. It looked like a New York 
Hospital unit. I said, okay. 



R. BRODERICK 6 

So we started following them. I don't 
know what the street was, but we got to 
Greenwich. He made the left and was moving to 
the devastation. My partner is saying, "Follow 
him. Follow him." I said, "I'm not following 
him. I'm going to go away from the scene." 

So I made a right onto Greenwich. 
Don't get me wrong, I'm not knocking my partner. 
He wanted to help. I understand that. You know 
what it is? I've been a lieutenant. I've been 
through the staging courses that they give you 
and the management courses. So in my head I'm 
clicking as a lieutenant actually or whatever 
that you get a safe area, because your no good to 
nobody unless you're safe. 

I pulled in. We found a spot on 
Harrison and Greenwich, clear as a bell. Nothing 
was going on. I said, "We're stopping here." So 
we parked the vehicle, put it on an angle. The 
next thing you know, an elderly woman came up to 
me and said she was having chest pain. So my 
partner and the young guy, Santiago, took her in 
the ambulance. 

Meanwhile I'm trying to notify the 



R. BRODERICK 7 

dispatcher exactly where we were, in case 
something did happen they would know where we 
were. Next thing you know, here comes another 
lady walking up saying she's having an asthma 
attack . 

Meanwhile a paramedic unit pulls in, an 
EMS paramedic unit. One guy I know -- I don't 
know his last name. His name is Joe. But I know 
he's out of Bellevue. And Eddie was his partner, 
a bald-headed gentleman. They took care of the 
asthma patient. 

Meanwhile I had -- no exaggeration, I 
had 25 people come up to me and volunteer. I 
didn't know what to do with them. I gave them 
all little stupid things to do just to keep them 
occupied. I'd say, all right, take this 
gentleman's name, take this gentleman's name, 
take this one's name, you know, just to keep 
them -- you can feel they wanted to do something, 
and there wasn't much they could do. 

Next thing you know, I see a man 
walking up the street, dragging up the street. 
So I run down to him. I grabbed him, and I look 
at his collar, his suit, and it was a WTC 



R. BRODERICK 8 

employee, World Trade Center. I don't know if he 
was a security person or -- I remember his face, 
I just don't remember -- I remember looking at 
his ID. I remember his face, but I don't 
remember his name. This guy looked like a tiger 
got at him. His shirt was all ripped up, pale, 
sweaty. I sat him down. 

Meanwhile at this time St. Vincent's 
medics pull in. The medic from St. Vincent used 
to be my partner, Phil. So Phil comes running 
over. I said, "Phil, I've got a World Trade 
Center guy here." Okay. He starts listening to 
his signs, started giving him oxygen, put him in 
the truck, put him in St. Vinnie's truck. 

The next thing you know, the police are 
running up the street. It wasn't 10, 15 minutes; 
we were there for a good hour. You figure by the 
time we dropped the patients off at Bellevue and 
went back to the scene, when I got to Pearl 
Street it had to be around 11 a.m., quarter to 
11, 11 a.m. 

So the next thing you know, cops were 
coming up and we were giving them respirator 
masks. Then they gave us things because we 



R. BRODERICK E 

didn't have things. We were treating the 
patients. The next thing you know, the police 
officers started running up the street and they 
said, "We've got to get out of here. We've got 
to get out of here. It's going to blow." There 
was supposed to be a gas leak. 

We just threw everybody in the 
ambulance, just threw everybody in the bus. The 
volunteers, the people that were so willing -- I 
had a gentleman come up to me and say, "I have a 
gentleman stuck in the elevator on the fifth 
floor right across the street." I said, "Sir, I 
can't do anything. I'm busy. Tell a police 
officer . " 

Q. Right. 

A. I'm really busy. I can't do it. He 
said, "Okay, no problem." I don't know where he 
went. We just threw everybody in the ambulance 
and just raced up about three blocks. There was 
a staging area there. I don't know whether it 
was -- again, everything was going so fast, I 
don't remember the streets. 

Lieutenant Remz was there, Lieutenant 
Maria Santaromita. I know these people from 



R. BRODERICK 10 

working at Woodhall Hospital many years ago. 
They are lieutenants now. I told them what we 
had, and they said no problem. Then I said we 
had numerous back boards because we found a 
vehicle unmanned, so we took their equipment so 
we could be prepared. We didn't know what else 
was going to happen. 

I think what happened was when we left 
West Street and Vesey, I assume that is when the 
second plane hit the tower. I was told that 
later on, the second plane hit the tower, and I 
saw it on TV for the people with cameras. 

From there on, then we went to Chelsea 
Pier and we sat there for two hours. I was 
getting bored. I'm here to do what I'm supposed 
to do. I don't want to get hurt, but I'm here to 
help . 

Then from there we left and we wound up 
at North Moore and Greenwich, where we assisted 
Lieutenant Dave -- 

Q. Restuccio? 

A. Restuccio? My partner Mike was his 
assistant getting the paperwork. Again, what 
we're taught in EMS is when you're the driver of 



R. BRODERICK 11 

the vehicle you're to maintain your vehicle so no 
one will steal it. So I stayed with my vehicle. 

When we were there, some kids -- we 
didn't know they were kids at the time -- started 
throwing something from the roof of the building 
off of -- and it was hitting the ground hard. 
Everybody started running, started panicking. 
The police went running in with their guns out. 
The next thing you know, they had tons -- I'm 
exaggerating, but we had like a dozen cops in 
riot gear standing in front of us. 

Then a gentleman was trying to get by 
with a bike, and the police officer started 
getting -- you could tell he was there. He had 
dust all over him. He was drained. The guy was 
pushing. The cop was getting annoyed. 

Anyway, from there on we just sat at 
North Moore and Greenwich. I saw building seven 
go down. I saw it actually go down. It was a 
couple blocks away from us . From there on we 
just sat there till -- I just sat there until 
10:30 at night and didn't do anything. I just 
watched everybody else going into what they call 
ground zero now. I was like, what are we doing 



R. BRODERICK 12 

here? I want to go. I want to get in there. I 
want to at least help, do something. That's what 
I'm trained for. 

From there on, again, from 2:00 in the 
afternoon to 10:30 at night, we just sat at North 
Moore and Greenwich. Of course at 1:00 in the 
afternoon I finally got a chance to phone my 
folks to let them know I was fine. Of course my 
house phone was busy. 

I called my father at work, who is now 
a security officer in the Marriott on 48th and 
Lexington, so he was very happy to hear my voice. 
He said, "I figured you'd be there." I said, "I 
just want to let you know I'm alive. I'm okay." 
I said it was really bad. It was the worst I've 
seen, and I've seen a lot in 22 years, going on 
22 years. This is the worst of my career that 
I've ever seen. It blew me away. 

I only went down there twice. I went 
down there the day it happened, and just about 
two weeks ago I was down at ground zero. We did 
family escorts. So I had to go back. There 
really was nothing I could do after that. The 
next day all I did was come to the station and 



R. BRODERICK 13 

clean the vehicles to get them all ready that 
were down there. 

So again, we got assigned to go down 
there. I was saying I don't want to go down 
there no more. It took me two weeks just to get 
over what I saw the first day. So all right. We 
go to ground zero. No problem. We go to 
staging. They told us we're going to be going on 
the boat. I said, "Oh, great. I'm a real boat 
lover . " I am. 

They were very nice. I couldn't 
believe the politeness. They were so nice, the 
state troopers there, which was scary when 
they're wearing their dark sunglasses. 

Okay. We did our first family escort 
on the boat, which wasn't too bad. That was my 
first time down since that day, and I could not 
believe the devastation that I saw, the hole. 

So we did one trip. One woman got 
nervous. She was crying, a British woman. A 
family member, I think her husband was in there, 
so I escorted her and another gentleman. We took 
her back to the boat and stayed with her, with 
the police officers guarding us like we were the 



R. BRODERICK 14 

president of the United States. Really, 
unbelievable . 

The guy, the correction officer, he was 
excellent. He helped us out great with taking 
our equipment and putting it on the car for us, 
following us wherever we went. He said, "We are 
here for you." I said, "Great. Thank you." 

Second trip, no problem. People were 
upset as usual but very nice. They were thanking 
us . 

The third trip, we went to ground zero. 
My partner says to me, "Look, I see a picture of 
a paramedic on her blouse." I said, "Let me go 
look." I'm curious. I go look. When somebody 
says something to you at the same time the name, 
I said Carlos. She said at the same time, it was 
his mother. She said, "You know Carlos?" I 
said, "Carlos, I used to work with him in 
Woodhull. " 

It was funny, I ran into him August 
5th. I know the date well because I ran my 
sister into the emergency room for emergency 
surgery, and he knew my sister. They were 
talking. Actually the last time I saw Carlos was 



R. BRODERICK 15 

August 5th. 

Anyway, I met his wife, very nice girl. 
I heard the story that he went there to get her 
out and she was out already and there was no way 
they could reach each other. It blew me away. 
It blew me away again. I was dealing with it, 
but when it comes close to home, like everybody 
else that's involved in the situation. 

I stayed with them. I stayed with them 
through the whole tour. I even told the 
lieutenant, the police officer that was involved 
with the job of escorting the families, I said 
I'm staying with them. She said no problem. I 
stayed with her crying on me. That's what blew 
me away, I think. The only thing I kept thinking 
of is that could have been me that day, and I was 
hoping that somebody would be doing that for my 
mother . 

Then when we were up on the podium, 



Then they started showing pictures two minutes 
before he was missing. It just blew me away. It 
tore me apart, it really did. 



R. BRODERICK 16 



We escorted them back to the boat. We 
even escorted them back to the staging area. The 
police officer that was involved with the family 
escort thing said they couldn't believe how great 
we were. 

So we got back to the station, and I 
heard the phone ring and Lieutenant Giblin was on 
the phone and he said, "They're standing in front 
of us." I said, "Oh, what do we do now?" I 
thought we were in trouble. He said, "No, that 
was the Mayor's office called OEM, OEM called 
EMS, and they want you guys back tomorrow because 
they said you did an excellent job." I said, 
"Well, I'm not going back. I can't." 

It blew me away. As a matter of fact, 
I didn't come to work the next day. I took the 
day off. No, I did come to work, I'm sorry. I 
worked with somebody else. I couldn't take it. 
It just blew me -- I'm strong, but it caught 
home . 

That's about it. I don't know what 
else to tell you. Again, it was the worst thing 



R. BRODERICK 17 

I ever seen in my whole career. 

Q. And hopefully ever will. 

A. Again, I've seen people decapitated. 
I've seen people dragged by tractor-trailers, and 
it never bothered me. Now I guess maybe because 
I'm getting older or it's just that I've seen so 
much that it's enough. 

But I still love my job. I still like 
taking care of people; I really do. I love 
taking care of the elderly. I go the nine yards. 
I don't care how long I'm on the scene, I go nine 
yards. That's the way I am. 

I don't know what else to tell you. 
That's about it, Mike. I don't know what else to 
really -- unless you have questions. 

Q. No, nothing else. It's just anything 
else you might want to say; if not, Rich -- 

A. I just feel real bad about the people 
that died. It's sad. It's unfortunate. I 
really think that's what caused the firemen and 
cops -- did I tell you I knew eight people. I 
knew four emergency service cops, three firemen, 
and that's really about it, the only seven people 
I knew. 



R. BRODERICK 18 

The emergency service cops were from 
here, Truck 2. Truck 2 in Manhattan, ESU 2, I 
knew the three guys very well, because my friend 
is an ESU sergeant, which thank God he was on 
vacation at his new home in New Winster. I know 
him; he would have been in. It took him two and 
a half hours . 

When I saw him three weeks -- I just 
saw him last week for the first time, and we're 
like buddy-buddy. He said, "Rich, I was worried 
about you. I thought you were there." I said, 
"I was." I said, "You know what? I'm glad you 
weren't there." It was like, I know him. 

But anyway, the officers that died, I 
knew them. I knew them. Pappageorge, I knew him 
from here. I didn't know him that well, but I 
knew him from here. I didn't know he was a 
firefighter. I didn't know he graduated and went 
to firefighter. 

Who else? Oh, a buddy of mine, my 
other friend, his brother's missing. I just ran 
into him last Saturday and he gave me a big hug 
and he said he was going to get in touch with me 
for the memorial service. I knew his brother 



R. BRODERICK 19 

Carl. He was a firefighter. He's been missing. 
He just got married seven months ago. 

So all these poor people that died. 
It's just sad. I was hoping somebody would talk 
to me about this, because it really has been 
eating me up. I'm pretty strong, but this has 
hit me hard. 

Q. This is something that nobody's ever 
seen before. That's what it is. 

A. I'm glad they're doing what they're 
doing right now. I hate to say it like that, but 
I'm glad they're doing what they're doing. We 
have to, because we're going to live in terror 
for the rest of our lives. 

I feel like I'm a prisoner now. Not 
too much, but just being stopped just to look at 
my ID to see if I'm getting on the bridge all 
right and letting the taxicabs get on for 
nothing. That's wrong. But that's how I feel. 

That's really all I have to say, Mike. 
I don't know what else to tell you, again, unless 
you have something else to ask me. 
Q. That's about it, Rich. 
A. I can't think of anything. All I can 



R. BRODERICK 20 

remember -- I met some nice people out of it from 
the volunteers that were helping. They were very 
nice. I couldn't believe the people that wanted 
to help. They were unbelievable. Actually 25 
people came up -- I didn't know what to do with 
them. I was lost. I'm trying to say, okay, you 
do this, you do that. 

One was a volunteer fireman. "I'm a 
volunteer fireman." "Take care of that World 
Trade Center guy." That was before the St. 
Vinnie medic came, like two minutes before they 
pulled in. I said, "Take care." I'm running 
around doing this, doing this, helping the cops, 
giving them masks. 

I mean, it's part of our job. I 
understand that. I felt good that I did 
something. I felt bad that I couldn't do more. 
I sat at that staging area all night. I really 
got bored. I was getting tired just standing 
there. I really wish I could have done more, but 
I did what I had to do and I feel good about it. 
Unfortunately it happened when it did. 

That's about it. 
Q. All right, Rich. I thank you so much 



R. BRODERICK 21 

for your interview and your feelings . 
A. I hope it works out. 

MR. TAMBASCO: This interview will 
conclude at 712 hours. 



File No. 9110158 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMT JONATHAN MORITZ 
Interview Date: October 25, 2001 



Transcribed by Nancy Francis 



J. MORITZ 

MR. RADENBERG: Today is October 25th, 2001. 
I'm Paul Radenberg of the Fire Department, City of New 
York. The time is now 0715 hours. I am conducting an 
interview with . . . 

EMT MORTIZ: Jonathan Moritz, M-o-r-i-t-z, 
EMT, Battalion 4, Unit 04 Henry, Tour 2, Shield No. 
2698. 

MR. RADENBERG: This interview is being 
conducted at EMS Battalion 4 regarding the events of 
September 11th, 2001. 

Q. Jonathan, if you'd begin. 
A. We had just signed on to the unit, we were 
heading to our 89 status, and my partner realized he 
had forgot a piece of his personal equipment back at 
the station. We immediately turned back around, came 
back to the station, retrieved the equipment. On our 
way back to our 89 status, we reported to the corner of 
Clinton Street and Madison Street. We were approached 
by about upwards of 75 to 100 people pointing and just 
extremely hysterical, and when we looked down Madison 
Street, it was a straight shot into the World Trade 
Center complex and there was a crater taken out of the 
upper floors, there was a heavy smoke and fire 
condition, debris was still coming down, and with that 



J. MORITZ 

the radio transmissions started to come in from other 
units with the priority message. Being the HAZTAC 
unit, we felt we needed to respond in on the scene. So 
we immediately went to the 63 status, tried to advise 
the dispatcher as best as possible. There was a lot of 
radio traffic. 

We proceeded down Madison Street to where it 
comes into Pearl and then Pearl Street comes down and 
around the back side of the World Trade Center on the 
east side and turns into I believe it's Water Street. 
It runs into Water Street, if I'm not mistaken. We 
were coming across Water Street and I remember there 
was a Fire patrol vehicle No. 3 in front of us that we 
followed in to the scene. 

When we got down around the ferry terminal, 
because we were trying to get into the staging area set 
up by the conditions boss, it became apparent that it 
was impossible. Traffic conditions were extremely 
tight, there were people everywhere, and we proceeded 
north, I believe, the wrong way, if I'm not mistaken, 
on Broadway, got up to about -- I want to say Dey 
Street or one of the side streets, very small street, 
ducked down to Trinity Place and proceeded north on 
Trinity Place to Church, and we parked somewhere 



J. MORITZ 

between Dey Street and Fulton Street. It seemed like 
the safest area at the time considering where the 
building was, where we had the most amount of 
patients. They were all exiting heading away from the 
Trade Center complex. We tried to get in touch with 
our conditions boss to let him know where we were, but 
radio traffic and patient care was making that 
relatively impossible. 

I remember there were many units on the 
scene. I don't remember who exactly was there. I 
remember we were treating several patients 
immediately. There was a burn patient, a jumper 
patient, a lot of trauma. I had gone back to my unit 
to get, I believe, the second oxygen tank or another 
piece of my personal protective equipment when we heard 
a second explosion, and when we looked up, the second 
Trade Center had been hit. With that, my partner, I 
believe, took off running away from the debris north on 
Church Street and I took off running down Dey Street 
and I was assisting people because it was quite 
chaotic. 

We were picking up people who were getting 
trampled on Dey Street, or least I was and I believe a 
police officer was, and we got halfway in, we stopped, 



J. MORITZ 

and my partner, I believe, was with the unit and he was 
down Fulton Street somewhere. We both -- I think it 
was a police officer and I. I don't remember his name 
or his shield -- ran back down the street and with that 
the patient count had tripled, if not more. There were 
more people coming up to us, more people injured. 

With that we received a police officer with a 
very serious arm injury. He was almost amputated by a 
piece of shrapnel. With that we also received a burn 
patient, a lady who had walked down from the 78th 
floor, believe it or not, with third-degree burns head 
to toe. I don't know if I could stand as badly as she 
was burned and she was walking. We had a lady who was 
complaining of chest pain and chest discomfort. Some 
vital signs indicated she had some sort of cardiac 
event transpiring, and I believe we had one more soft 
tissue injury patient. We proceeded in loading them 
up, transporting them, providing the best care 
possible. 

I made the decision to go to Cornell 
Hospital. There was a burn center as well as a trauma 
center. It was also not as close to the hospitals that 
would have been overrun. So to try to space out 
patients, I took them uptown. I remember when we got 



J. MORITZ 

to the hospital everybody was on standby and waiting. 
We off-loaded our patients. I transferred care to the 
best of my ability. 

I was monitoring the radio and they said that 
the No. 2 tower had collapsed. With that I expedited 
my ER time tenfold. I started heading back down the 
FDR towards the scene when I heard the second tower had 
collapsed . 

Q. Do you remember how far down you made it on 
the FDR? 

A. I remember we had just gotten off by the 59th 
Street bridge, if I'm not mistaken. We got onto 59th 
Street, right there by the Queensborough Bridge, went 
southbound on the FDR. We were coming down underneath 
the underpass right there where you get on the FDR and 
you have I believe there's the Hospital for Special 
Surgery, if I'm not mistaken, over the top of you at 
that particular part. 

When we came up the FDR, all we saw was the 
smoke, of course. We proceeded down the FDR to South 
Street. We got off on South Street and tried to make 
it into the -- one staging area we had heard was in 
Battery Park and that's where we were heading for. 

We got to the Brooklyn Bridge. It was myself 



J. MORITZ 

and two other units. I think they were just skeleton 
units thrown together when this all transpired from our 
station. We got as far as the Brooklyn Bridge and we 
were enveloped in the cloud of settling debris. 

With that they transmitted the message that 
everybody was going to report to Chelsea Piers. We 
turned our vehicles around and we proceeded back 
northbound on the FDR to 34th or 42nd Street, crossed 
town and staged until later that evening, when we were 
(inaudible) . 

Q. When you got up to Fulton and Church, do you 
recall who else was there? 

A. I don't. I don't recall. There were so many 
units there that, in so short amount of time that, you 
know, you were seeing people. As far as people who are 
missing? Everybody that I saw at the scene I've seen 
later on. I saw a Cabrini crew that I've worked with 
later in days transpiring after this. We really 
weren't on scene as long as we should have been. We 
got overwhelmed with patients immediately and we 
transported before we could really get into the 
operation of the MCI. 

Q. Any thoughts or comments that you'd like to 
add, like odd event that stands out in your mind? 



J. MORITZ 

A. No. 

Q. Opinions? 

A. You run very fast when buildings have 
airplanes crashing into them. 

MR. RADENBERG: Okay. The time is now 0724 
and the interview is concluded. 



File No. 9110159 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

EMT PETER HAYDEN 

Interview Date: October 25, 2001 



Transcribed by Nancy Francis 



P. HAYDEN 

MR. RADENBERG: Today is October 25th, 2001. 
I'm Paul Radenberg of the Fire Department of the City 
of New York. The time is now 0541 hours. I'm 
conducting an interview with. . . 

EMT HAYDEN: Peter Hayden, EMT, Battalion 4. 

MR. RADENBERG: This interview is being 
conducted at EMS Battalion 4 regarding the events of 
the morning of September 11th, 2001. 

Q. Peter, if you'd begin with when you found out 
about the assignment. 

A. I had a day off and my brother had woke me up 
to show me the news, and I had saw the news and what 
had happened and right away I grabbed my equipment, got 
dressed and went in to work. I got into Manhattan 
about 9:30 and I was looking for the EMS command post, 
which I was told was on West and Chambers. While I was 
walking over there, World Trade 2 began to come down, 
and I ran away from the scene and got caught in the 
dust cloud that put a darkness over us and it was hard 
to breathe. We helped people into buildings, after 
that onto buses down to Battery Park, and there was 
nothing really to do for the patient except get them 
water. So we were just retrieving water for them. 

A half hour later, a couple of EMTs and I 



P. HAYDEN 

decided to go back and help some more people back into 
the buildings of the New York Downtown Athletic Club, 
and people started running again because 1 World Trade 
began to come down. So we ran again and the same thing 
happened, darkness, cloud of smoke, people were having 
trouble breathing, get them inside, onto buses, putting 
them down to Battery Park. From there we just kept 
getting water. 

From there I walked up Albany and I ran into 
another off-duty EMT from this battalion. I'm not sure 
of his name. What we did was we heard over the radio 
that there was staging down at Battery Park, so we had 
emptied a couple of ambulances of the equipment and put 
them into one ambulance and drove it over to Battery 
Park. I stayed there for a few hours and just waited 
and we were giving water to firefighters and police 
officers that had ventured over, and that was basically 
my role for the day. 

Q. How did you get into Manhattan? 

A. I had driven to the tunnel, the Battery Park 
Tunnel. A lot of us left personal cars and I pulled 
over and I hopped into a Suburban, a Fire Department 
vehicle, and they had transported me through. 

Q. Do you remember the number of the vehicle or 



P. HAYDEN 



anything like that? 

A. No, I don't. 

Q. Did it have a battalion number on the side? 

A. No, I don't remember. 

Q. But it wasn't an EMS Suburban? 

A. No, it was Fire Department. 

Q. You came through the Battery. How far up 
towards the Trade Center, if you remember, did you get 
when you got out of the Suburban? 

A. I think they let us off at West Street and 
Albany. 

Q. West Street and Albany. Okay. 

You said you'd heard command was up on West 
and Chambers? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Were you coming straight up the West Side 
Highway? 

A. Yes. 

Q. While you were on the West Side Highway, do 
you remember approximately where you were when the 
first tower came down? 

A. I was in between Albany and Cedar. I hadn't 
gone very far because I was asking around where the 
staging area was . 



P. HAYDEN 

Q. Right. 

A. I didn't see any other EMS personnel around. 

Q. When the first tower came down, do you 
remember where you went? 

A. I ran straight south on West Street, and I 
guess I had reached about a block, I guess around 
Carlisle Street, whatever this is, and I had jumped 
next to a divider. I made it to the Downtown Athletic 
Club, where there were dozens upon dozens of people 
with several problems just trying to breathe. The most 
we could do for them, because nobody really had tech 
bags with them, was just get them water and we were 
just handing out bottles of water and that was the most 
we could do for these people. 

Q. When you came back up towards the site, you 
said you had basically stripped down a couple of 
ambulances to get one stocked? 

A. Right. 

Q. Do you remember where that was? 

A. No, I'm not exactly sure where that was, but 
it was maybe between Washington and Greenwich. It was 
outside of a Chase Manhattan Bank. There were a few 
abandoned ambulances and they were locked. So I saw 
somebody breaking into the ambulance. He happened to 



P. HAYDEN 

be an EMS personnel from this battalion. He said, help 
me, we'll get all the equipment onto this bus, there's 
keys in it, and we'll take it over to Battery Park 
because we heard over the radio that there was staging 
down there. So that's what we did. 

Q. Do you remember what vehicle number it was, 
by chance? 

A. I don't remember, no. 

Q. With those vehicles, it was just you and the 
other EMT? 

A. And there was a guy from New Jersey who said 
he was an EMT from over there and he helped us. 

Q. Do you remember who the other EMT was from 
the battalion? 

A. His first name is Walter. 

Q. Walter. Do you know his last name? 

A. No. 

Q. When you came back, you got that ambulance 
down there, and was it while you were down at Battery 
Park that the second tower came down? 

A. No. I had taken the ambulance after the 
second tower came down. 

Q. After the second tower came down. Do you 
remember where you were when the second tower came 



P. HAYDEN 

down? 

A. I was around the same area. 

Q. Still in the same area? Okay. Do you recall 
seeing any other EMS officers? 

A. Not officers. 

Q. Or EMS personnel -- 

A. Yes. 

Q. -- that you know the names of? 

A. No, I don't know their names. They weren't 
from this battalion, I know that. We all started 
helping. There was a bus and we were helping civilians 
get onto the bus. 

Q. An ambulance or a city bus? 

A. It was a city bus. 

Q. Okay. 

A. We were getting people on there so they could 
transport them down to the ferries. 

Q. All at that point minor injuries? 

A. Yes. I didn't see any injuries. 

Q. Nothing? 

A. Just people complaining, you know, thirsty 
from dust that they were breathing in. 

Q. Does anything anything stand out in your mind 
as just an odd event or something like that that sticks 



P. HAYDEN 

in your head from that day or any comments or opinions 
you'd like to add about it? 

A. No. I mean, I didn't even actually get to 
look at the towers collapsing because I pretty much 
heard them, looked up, saw it and turned around and 
ran, and it was just get people water and get them on 
the bus and get them out of there. 

Q. Okay. That's pretty much it, unless there's 
something else you'd like to add. 

A. I spent the rest of the day looking for my 
father, who is a fireman. 

Q. Did you find him? 

A. Yes. 

MR. RADENBERG: Thank you, Peter. 
EMT HAYDEN: Thank you. 

MR. RADENBERG: The time is now 0549 hours 
and the interview is concluded. 



PERUGGIA 



File No. 9110160 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMS DIVISION CHIEF JOHN PERUGGIA 
Interview Date: October 25, 2001 



Transcribed by Elisabeth F. Nason 



J. PERUGGIA 

MR. CASTORINA: Today is October 25, 2001. 

I'm Ron Castorina conducting an interview. The 

time now is 0835 hours. Your name? 
MR. McCOURT: Tom McCourt. 
MR. CASTORINA: Also sitting here on the 

interview. 

Q. Your name sir? 

A. John PERUGGIA. 

Q. What is your rank and title? 

A. EMS Division Chief, in charge of planning for 
the Chief of Department's office. 

Q. Can you tell me on September 11, 2001 what 
took place that day? 

A. At approximately 8:50 in the morning I was on 
my way in to work in my assigned Department vehicle. 
At that point in time I was on the Staten Island 
Expressway, just before the Verrazano Bridge. I 
received a telephone call from one of my staff people, 
EMT Richard Zarrillo, on the Department cell phone. He 
indicated to me that a plane had just crashed into the 
World Trade Center. The Chief was leaving the 
building. Chief Nigro, my immediate boss, was leaving 
the building, along with Chief Ganci and he asked me 
for some direction. I told him and told him to tell 



J. PERUGGIA 

the rest of the staff that was in headquarters, just to 
stand fast. My ETA was approximately 10 to 15 minutes 
and that we would just wait a little bit and see. 

Shortly thereafter, maybe a few minutes, I 
was on the Verrazano Bridge approaching mid span. I 
was able to see visually the World Trade Center and the 
extent of the damage and fire coming from the tower, 
which was struck. At that point I realized that it 
wasn't maybe just a small private aircraft that may 
have struck the building, but something much more 
significant and this had the potential to be a 
catastrophic type incident. 

Being familiar with the World Trade Center 
complex and the extent of chaos that could occur during 
a tragedy, as I was present shortly after the bombing 
in 1993, I called EMT Zarrillo back on his cell phone. 
I directed him to round up the rest of the staff, which 
consisted of a Captain and two Lieutenants, Captain 
Abdo Nahmod, Lieutenant John Nevins and Lieutenant Brad 
Mann and tell them to start making their way over to 
the World Trade Center. Whatever it was that hit the 
building from what I was seeing at my location, I knew 
that their assistance would be needed. 

At that point I hung up the phone, put my 



J. PERUGGIA 

emergency lights on the vehicle, got behind an 
ambulance or between an ambulance and a police car and 
our entire little package was now en route to the 
incident . 

Moments later I got a notification on my 
Department pager to call the fire operations center. I 
immediately called them. They advised me that the 
Office of Emergency Management had been activated. I 
am the person in operations who is responsible for 
staffing OEM or the Police Department's command and 
control center. I told them that I would respond in. 
I gave them directions to notify the fire First 
Division to have them start out a fire rep. I also 
asked them to page Captain Nahmod and EMT Zarrillo and 
have them redirect themselves to OEM. 

I pulled my car over to the side, when I got 
off the Verrazano Bridge. I grabbed my Department 
radio from the trunk, turned it on to the frequency and 
advised the dispatcher that I was responding. I 
continued then in on my response. As I was passing 
through the Battery Tunnel, probably around midway 
through the Battery Tunnel, I heard the report come 
over the radio that a second plane had struck the 
second tower. At that point I realized to myself that 



J. PERUGGIA 

this wasn't just an accident, but more than likely some 
sort of terrorist event. 

I came out of the Battery Tunnel and as soon 
as I came out, I parked my car immediately on the 
western side of northbound West Street between Rector 
and West. I'm going to mark that on the map with a 
number one. I put my boots on. I put my EMS safety 
coat on, my helmet, grabbed the radio and a pad and 
began to walk my way up West Street. My initial intent 
was to pass through the site, make contact with the 
Chief at the command post and advise them that I was en 
route to 7 World Trade Center, the Office of Emergency 
Management, to provide staffing, as it was now 
activated . 

Q. As you were walking into the scene, the 
second plane had just hit -- 

A. Just moments. 

Q. What were you observing? 

A. It was very chaotic on the street. There 
were lots of people running around. There was heavy 
fire and smoke emanating from both towers in the World 
Trade Center, the upper floors. As I walked up the 
street, I was being passed by police and firefighters 
heading in both directions, some towards the site and 



J. PERUGGIA 

some away from the site. I passed over some pieces of 
what appeared to be aircraft wreckage, fuselage, 
whatever, some body parts and bodies in various states, 
either people from the building or the airplanes. You 
couldn't tell. They weren't intact. 

As I approached Albany Street, I crossed over 
to the southbound side of West Street because there was 
debris coming down from the building, people were 
running from the building and also it was very 
dangerous. So for my own safety I crossed on to that 
side and proceeded to walk northbound on West Street. 
As I made it to in front of what would be 1 World Trade 
Center, I'm going to mark that number 2 on the map, 
maybe just south of the north bridge, there was the 
inter-agency command post or at least the Fire 
Department command post. I saw Chief Ganci, I saw -- 

Q. Inside the lobby? 

A. No, this was on the southbound side of West 
Street, you know, in front of like the World Financial 
Center, across the street from the building. I saw 
Chief Ganci, I saw Chief Nigro. There were a number of 
other people. I really wasn't paying attention. I 
made a verbal contact with Chief Ganci and Chief 
Nigro. I advised them that I was en route to 7 World 



J. PERUGGIA 

Trade. OEM was active. I had already given directions 
to two of the staff to respond there, as well as a 
representative from the fire First Division. 

I told them that if any of them had 
appropriate protective gear with them, once we got 
settled, I would release as many people from there as 
necessary to maybe help support the operations. We 
didn't need lots of stuff up there. 

At that point I made contact with Captain 
James Yakimovich. He's a fire Captain who was detailed 
to headquarters with us for a little while. He was on 
a special assignment. He was in personnel on 
Washington Street. He was writing the fire 
Lieutenant's exam or whatever. He was in civilian 
clothes. He came out to the site when he heard what 
happened. He has experience at staffing OEM. I have 
used him on a number of occasions. I said Jimmy, you 
don't have gear with you. Why don't you come with me 
to OEM and if the First Division rep has gear we will 
release them. 

So both of us were preparing then to leave 
the command post and make our way northbound on West 
Street to Vesey and then we would go to OEM. At that 
point Chief Ganci placed his hand on my shoulder and 



J. PERUGGIA 

told me that I should be careful walking over there 
because there was stuff falling off the building. I 
told him not to worry about it. I was a big boy. 

I reached 7 World Trade Center. We walked 
into the lobby and we were going up the escalators to 
the main level. I checked in at the security desk. As 
we reached the top of the escalators, there were lots 
of people running down the escalator on the promenade. 
I spoke to one of the Deputy Directors and as I was 
speaking with him, I believe it was Deputy Director 
Rotanz, who is a Fire Department Captain on detail over 
there, Captain Nahmod and EMT Zarrillo approached as 
well. They had indicated that the building was being 
evacuated . 

I questioned as to what the nature of the 
evacuation was. I was told that it was not because of 
what was occurring across the street. No one feared 
that the building was in any danger as a result of two 
airplane attacks and subsequent fires, but that there 
were reports of a third plane that had been hijacked. 
It was unidentified, the location, and they thought it 
may be coming in for an additional strike. Therefore, 
they were evacuating the building. 

We proceeded down to the lobby where the 



J. PERUGGIA 

various agency representatives were present. We 
collectively started to set up in the lobby and try to 
think of strategies to where we could move the 
inter-agency cooperation effort. 

At that point, I also had a face to face 
discussion with Battalion Chief Mike Maggio from the 
First Battalion. He was the person who was sent up to 
be the rep at OEM. Mike is someone who assists us on 
lots of our event planning. He was detailed there. He 
didn't have any gear with him. He was a light duty 
Chief on administrative assignment there. So I told 
Captain Yakimovich that we are not going to send a 
Chief back. At that point he indicated that he was 
going to run over to 10 and 10 and secure gear and then 
report back to the command post and assist the Chief 
there. I told him that would be fine. I didn't need a 
lot of people inside. They needed more help outside. 

As we were having discussions in the lobby as 
to what to do with OEM, a number of people came in the 
lobby as patients. Captain Nahmod and EMT Zarrillo 
started to look at them, put them off to the side and 
talk to them. At that point I stepped outside. I was 
going to request some EMS resources and I had face to 
face contact with Captain Mark Stone of the EMS 8 



10 

J. PERUGGIA 



Battalion . 

Q. What kind of patients were you seeing? 

A. There was two or three people who had smoke 
inhalation. There was another person who was bleeding 
significantly from his lower leg and unable to stand. 
He was trying to limp and crawl. 

Q. They came from outside? 

A. Yes. Later it was determined that he had a 
fracture of his leg, so we put him on a chair and the 
other people, we put them off to the side. I ran into 
Captain Stone. He had, I believe it was two EMTs with 
him. I told him that --he was in his full gear and 
radio. I directed him to respond over, report into the 
EMS command post and I told him that I put Captain 
Nahmod in charge of whatever little treatment sector 
that we would establish here in the lobby. 

Q. Where was the EMS command post? 

A. I don't know where the EMS command post was 
at that time. Again I didn't hear much. There was 
lots of stuff going on the radio. My mission at that 
time was not that of an EMS Chief responding to the 
operation. My mission was, as the Chief of Planning 
for the Fire Department, to respond in to handle the 
agency liaison stuff. 



11 

J. PERUGGIA 



I told Captain Stone he could respond over to 
the EMS command post so he could take a field 
assignment or whatever, since he was appropriately 
dressed. EMT Zarrillo and Captain Nahmod responded 
from headquarters without turnout gear, helmets or -- 
EMT Zarrillo had his helmet with him. So Captain Abdo 
Nahmod established a treatment center. I requested 
over the Citywide radio for two BLS units to respond to 
my location at 7 World Trade Center where we 
established treatment. 

At that point I continued to liaison with my 
counterparts over at OEM. A short while later, just 
maybe a few moments, Dr. Asaeda, Office of Medical 
Affairs, and the EMT or paramedic that was with him, 
showed up. I told him we were seeing a number of 
people. In other words, more than 3 at that point in 
time, but again I wasn't directly involved, so I 
couldn't tell you the number. He said fine. He said 
he would stay over at our location and work with us 
there. We were in close proximity to the building. If 
you are familiar, I'll mark it with number 3 on the 
map, in front of 7 World Trade Center. 

Directly across the street there are some 
escalators that come down from the promenade. There is 



12 
J. PERUGGIA 



also an overhead pedestrian walkway that connects the 
World Trade Center plaza to the lobby of number 7. 
There was people coming down both exits. So it was a 
good position for us to find people who may require 
medical attention and get them into a secured area of 
the lobby. I didn't have any EMS people working out on 
Vesey Street proper, because it was not a safe 
location. There was people jumping out of the windows 
of the World Trade Center. We were witnessing that. 
There was debris falling down from the north tower and 
making its way on to the street and promenade where we 
were located. 

A few moments after Dr. Asaeda arrived and 
started talking to Captain Nahmod about the patients, a 
gentleman from the building identified himself as a 
security person or a security director. He asked me if 
there is anything that we needed or he could provide me 
with regard to the EMS. We questioned him as to the 
ability to open up the loading bays which are 
associated to number 7 World Trade Center. The 
entrances are located directly under the pedestrian 
foot bridge. I figured it was protected there, so 
debris wouldn't fall down. He said he would do that. 
I directed Captain Nahmod to move the patients into 



13 
J. PERUGGIA 



that area. Again, the lobby of number 7 is all glass 
facade. I was concerned that if something should come 
off the building, go through the glass or hit the 
glass, we would have an extraordinary amount of 
patients in addition to what was already being seen. 

Further we took everyone from OEM and moved 
them to what would be the most southeasterly corner 
inside that first floor entrance of the 7 World Trade. 
There is a big granite or marble security desk and we 
started to establish around that as we were trying to 
figure out what we were going to do. 

At that point again, I went out front to see 
what was going on and where the ambulances I had 
requested were. I had a face to face with Fire 
Commissioner Thomas Von Essen. He was there with his 
driver. He was wearing his protective gear and his 
helmet. He questioned me as to -- I told him I was 
there for OEM, operating in the lobby, that the 
building was being evacuated and the nature of that. 
He indicated if I knew the whereabouts of the Mayor. I 
told him that as I was approaching OEM and coming up 
Vesey Street, I saw a large contingency of gentlemen in 
suits exiting down Vesey Street proceeding north on 
West toward Barclay. I recognized some of the people 



14 
J. PERUGGIA 



in that group as staff and TAs for the Mayor. I told 
him more than likely that was probably the direction 
the Mayor went . 

He asked me what was going on. I told him 
what was going on. I told him where the command post 
was and that Chief Ganci, Chief Nigro and I had just 
spoken a few minutes earlier at that location. He said 
okay and he proceeded then westbound on Vesey towards 
West. 

Q. Who was he with, was he with some of his 
aides? 

A. He was with his driver or somebody again, I 
don't remember exactly who he was with. Time 
proceeded. We were listening to the radio for updates 
of what was going on. Our patient count was probably a 
half dozen to a dozen at that point. We had maybe 
three or four EMTs working under Captain Nahmod with 
Dr. Asaeda. We had a whole treatment center set up 
inside those bays. They got folding chairs from the 
building security. 

They had back boards, they had oxygen. It 
was working out real nice. Everyone was stable so 
there was no rush to start screaming for additional 
ambulances. I felt at that point we were in a fairly 



15 
J. PERUGGIA 



secure location in those bays. That was one less 
concern that I needed to be worried about at that 
point . 

Several minutes passed by. I then 
encountered Chief Nigro in front of the building. 

Q. What building was he in front of? 

A. In front of 7 World Trade Center. He 
indicated he was in the process of doing a perimeter 
survey of the complex to get a good grip on the extent 
of damage in the fire. I guess he would then bring 
that back and he and Chief Ganci were going to discuss 
strategy. We spoke for several minutes. I briefed him 
on everything that was going on, where the Fire 
Commissioner had gone, that the Mayor was out and the 
building was evacuated. Told him about treatment. 
Told him that I was the liaison. Told him that I would 
keep Chief Ganci abreast of any significant information 
that was provided. 

He thanked me and told me to be careful. He 
continued westbound on Vesey Street towards Church. He 
continued his perimeter search. Shortly thereafter, I 
noticed three firefighters operating on the southbound 
side of Vesey directly underneath the pedestrian 
promenade, between the pedestrian bridge and the 



16 
J. PERUGGIA 



escalators. One of them signaled over to me. I went 
over to talk with them. I noticed they were without an 
officer. They told me they got separated from their 
officer when they were operating up on the plaza. I 
don't recall what company they were from. I do 
remember that at least one, if not two of them, were 
probies, by the orange plates on the helmet. 

They indicated that there was lots of people 
on the plaza, that they thought were dead and people 
were jumping out and said you know, what should we do. 
I indicated to them that if people were jumping out, 
more than likely they were correct, the patients were 
dead. There was nothing that anybody could do for them 
and that in light of what was going on, operating on 
the plaza wasn't safe for them. 

I further went on to tell them that since 
they were separated from their officer it was probably 
a good idea if they were to proceed eastbound on Vesey 
towards Church. There were some several companies, I 
noticed, operating up on Church and Vesey. I told them 
they could hook up with one of those companies or 
officer. At least this way they would be with a group, 
they would be accounted for. 

They were in the process of securing a 



17 
J. PERUGGIA 



hydrant and then they said they would move on. At that 
point I went back into the building. I was in a 
discussion with Mr. Rotanz and I believe it was a 
representative from the Department of Buildings, but 
I'm not sure. Some engineer type person, and several 
of us were huddled talking in the lobby and it was 
brought to my attention, it was believed that the 
structural damage that was suffered to the towers was 
quite significant and they were very confident that the 
building's stability was compromised and they felt that 
the north tower was in danger of a near imminent 
collapse. 

I grabbed EMT Zarrillo, I advised him of that 
information. I told him he was to proceed immediately 
to the command post where Chief Ganci was located. 
Told him where it was across the street from number 1 
World Trade Center. I told him "You see Chief Ganci 
and Chief Ganci only. Provide him with the information 
that the building integrity is severely compromised and 
they believe the building is in danger of imminent 
collapse." So, he left off in that direction. 

Q. They felt that just the one building or both 
of them? 

A. The information we got at that time was that 



18 
J. PERUGGIA 



they felt both buildings were significantly damaged, 
but they felt that the north tower, which was the first 
one to be struck, was going to be in imminent danger of 
collapse. Looking up at it, you could see that, you 
could see through the smoke or whatever, that there was 
significant structural damage to the exterior of the 
building. Very noticeable. Now you know, again, this 
is not a scene where the thought of both buildings 
collapsing ever entered into my mind. 

I was there in 1993, 14 minutes after the 
bomb went off. I operated some 16 hours at the 
building and with all the post-incident critiques and 
debrief ings with various agencies. We were always told 
by everyone, the experts, that these buildings could 
withstand direct hits from airplanes. That's the way 
they were designed. They went through all of this 
architectural stuff, way beyond the scope of my 
knowledge. 

It was hit by an airplane. That's okay. 
It's made to be hit by an airplane. I mean I think 
everyone may have believed that. We were all told 
years ago it was made to be hit by an airplane. 

Some amount of time passed by, probably not 
long, again, I wasn't checking my watch. Actually we 



19 
J. PERUGGIA 



were just really disgusted, maybe we were going to move 
what we were going to do and how we were going to try 
to coordinate. Things were hectic. We didn't have the 
tools that we normally have to communicate with our 
agency, you know, cellular phones were not working 
properly, radio was very difficult to get through. I 
work for the Chief of the Department, I don't have a 
fire ground radio, so I had no direct communications 
with my boss at that time, which is one of the reasons 
I needed to send EMT Zarrillo with that message, which 
I felt was very significant, to the command post. 

Just moments before the south tower collapsed 
and, you know, when it happened we didn't know it was 
the south tower. We thought it was the north tower. 
There was a reporter of some sort, female with blond 
hair and her cameraman, an oriental fellow. They were 
setting up outside 7 World Trade Center, just east of 
the pedestrian bridge. I told them it would probably 
be better off to be set up under the bridge. At least 
it was protected. I was just about to enter a dialogue 
with her when I heard a sound I never heard before. I 
looked up and saw this huge cloud. I told him run. I 
grabbed the female, I threw her through the revolving 
doors of number 7. We were proceeding inside. She 



20 
J. PERUGGIA 



fell to the ground. I helped her out, I pushed her 
towards the direction of where we were all in the south 
corner and there was a little doorway behind that desk 
which led into the loading bays. 

Everybody started to run through that. Never 
made it to that door. The next thing that I remember 
was that I was covered in some glass and some debris. 
Everything came crashing through the front of number 
7. It was totally pitch black. 

Q. Were you injured? 

A. Yes, I saw some stuff had fallen on me. I 
didn't believe that I was injured at that time. I 
discovered later on I was injured. I had some shards 
of glass impaled in my head, but once I was able to get 
all this debris and rubble off of me and cover my face 
with my jacket so that I could breathe, it was very 
thick dust, you couldn't see. We heard some sounds. 
We reached out and felt our way around. I managed to 
find some other people in this lower lobby. We crawled 
over towards the direction where we thought the door 
was and as we approached it the door cracked open a 
little, so we had the lights from the loading bay. We 
made our way over there. The loading bay doors were 3 
fourths of the way shut when this happened, so they 



21 
J. PERUGGIA 



took a lot of dust in there, but everyone in those bays 
was safe and secure. We had face to face contact with 
Chief Maggio and Captain Nahmod . They told me -- I 
said do whatever you need to do, get these people out 
of here. Go, go towards the water. 

They proceeded to evacuate that group along 
with some secret service people. 

Q. How did they get out, did they go out the 
loading bay? 

A. I believe what happened was they opened the 
bay and they went out and they proceeded south on 
Vesey. The phone building is the next building 
adjacent to the east on Vesey and that had an exterior 
scaffolding set up on it and overhead protection. And 
I believe that's the way, speaking to Captain Nahmod 
later, that they moved the people. Again I didn't go 
with them. Myself and Phil Parr, the Battalion Chief 
detailed here to headquarters, I don't know how he 
ended up. 

Q. At this point the south tower is down? 

A. We didn't know that, but it was the south 
tower that was down. Phil Parr, Battalion Chief, again 
he had no protective equipment whatever. I'm not sure 
how he ended up there. I think he was detailed here to 



22 
J. PERUGGIA 



headquarters and he made his way over there. He used 
to be a Deputy Director of OEM. So he made his way 
there. I didn't initially see him, but when it was all 
over, me and Phil found one another. We grabbed some 
hand lights from some Port Authority guys. 

Q. What did you think had happened? 

A. I thought that part of the building or the 
facade of the building had collapsed. You know, it was 
too dusty to see outside, so we didn't know what 
happened, but I knew something real bad happened. I 
knew that everyone that we had in the lobby, or we 
thought everyone was accounted for. Again, there was a 
lot of rubble in the lobby, probably a few feet. The 
facade was all broken. Me and Phil grabbed some hand 
lights and the people who were still there at ground 
level, we directed them to the door where there were 
guys who were going to lead them out. Some Port 
Authority and some secret service, you know, they were 
housed at number 7. Captain Nahmod and Battalion Chief 
Maggio, they were going to lead that group of people. 
Probably in excess of 30 or 40 people out of the 
building . 

Me and Phil then proceeded up the 
escalators. We walked up the escalators with our 



23 
J. PERUGGIA 



lights, even though we couldn't see anything with the 
lights that we had acquired. We reached the top of the 
escalators. We ran into another Port Authority officer 
who had a light. We told him to stand fast at the top 
of the escalators and just keep waving his light, you 
know, back and forth in a side to side motion, and that 
we were going to perform some search of that mezzanine 
level, I guess would be best to call it, or concourse 
level, whatever. 

You know the level where the foot bridge 
connects, whatever. We found maybe a half dozen or so 
people out there. We told them to cover their heads 
and their faces with, you know, their shirts or clothes 
or whatever to help them breathe and to walk towards 
the Port Authority light. A few minutes after we were 
unable to see -- 

Q. Was that building already evacuated for the 
most part? 

A. When we got there it was in the process of 
evacuation, so for the most part, with the exception of 
some rescuers that were still upstairs doing 
evacuation, it was fairly empty. We didn't see anybody 
else or hear anybody else on that level. We told the 
Port Authority cop that he could make his way down. 



24 
J. PERUGGIA 



Just make sure that everyone else had got out. He 
being most familiar with the building, you know, the 
Port Authority complex. 

We made our way to the doors which led to the 
pedestrian bridge, both myself and Chief Parr, as I 
said, I'm talking about both of us. We were able to 
force the door open and kick some debris out of the 
way. We made it to the overhead walkway and we started 
to walk south towards the Trade Center plaza. It 
became a little easier to breathe. There was still a 
tremendous amount of dust cloud in the air. But, at 
least it was open air, you know. 

We looked left and right, could see the 
devastation on the street. We saw a couple of rigs 
collapsed and cars and again still not realizing what 
the nature was. We reached the plaza. We were 
underneath . 

Q. You still couldn't see up if it was the 
building? 

A. Correct, correct. We were walking underneath 
number 6 World Trade Center. If you have seen the 
pictures or are familiar with the way those buildings 
come, they come up and then they angle out so there is 
like a covered walkway path. We were there. We ran 



25 
J. PERUGGIA 



into a few firefighters. We told them that we were 
going to try to make a chain of people and if we found 
anybody we would get them out. There were lots of 
bodies on the plaza. A couple of firefighters and 
police officers that we saw in the rubble that we were 
able to get to and get out of the rubble and direct 
towards the people, they got out. There were a few 
people in the rubble that were dead, both firefighters 
and police officers and civilians that we knew we 
couldn't do anything for. 

Q. You had some alive, also? 

A. Yes, we assisted them out. There were 
pockets of fire everywhere. At that point I noticed it 
was unusually lit in the plaza, considering the event 
that happened. I looked up and saw this big gaping 
hole where the south tower used to be. That's the 
first point that I realized that the south tower had 
collapsed. Maybe ten or 15 stories high left of it. 
Probably most of it being a pile of rubble. 

The fire was still engaged, lots of smoke 
coming out of the north tower. I was like holy shit, I 
can't believe that this happened. Maybe if I would 
have known that I wouldn't have went up on the plaza. 
I don't know. 



26 
J. PERUGGIA 



At that point I was up there with Phil. We 
were just searching for people. As we reached the 
corner of the 6 World Trade Center, the customs 
building, like in the plaza area when you walk in and 
then the building, the corner of it, we turned the 
corner and we saw this large mass of people. We called 
out to them. Phil ran to them. I rallied some ESU 
officers and firefighters who were down near the Vesey 
Street side. Told them we had a bunch of people. Some 
guys should come down. The rest should be able to 
direct them. We proceeded to evacuate several hundred 
civilians . 

Q. Where were they coming from? 

A. Most of them were coming --it appeared they 
were coming out of like number 6 onto the plaza, but 
some were also coming from number 1 World Trade Center 
on the plaza area. Again, we directed them to cover 
their mouths with their clothing. Some people were 
just walking in a daze. We had to grab them and push 
them on their way or rip their shirt and give them 
something to cover. Told them not to look at the 
bodies that were there, not to worry about the fires or 
people. Just tried to focus them on getting them to 
the corner. I'm going to mark that number 4 on the 



27 
J. PERUGGIA 



map, so then they could proceed northbound along the 
edge of number 6 and then go down the escalators. We 
had some guys posted. Get them on the escalators and 
head them towards City Hall. Get them out of the 
scene. 

We got several hundred people out. A few 
people were obviously injured. We told them they would 
get help when they got downstairs. Even though I knew 
I didn't have anyone down there, I figured at some 
point they would run into somebody. Their injuries 
weren't significant enough that they required treatment 
nor were we able to provide treatment. My Department 
radio was not working at that time. It was clogged 
with dirt and dust. I couldn't get it to work so I 
couldn't talk to anyone. I was not able to get through 
on my cell phone to anybody either. So we were sort of 
operating independently and our point at that time we 
were just to try to evacuate these terrified 
individuals . 

There were one or two people who couldn't 
walk. We were able to get some police and firefighters 
and take pieces of building debris and make like little 
makeshift carry things and they carried some people 
off. 



28 
J. PERUGGIA 



I ran into a former Fire Department employee 
who used to work with me, Nick Cagliuso, who used to 
work in the Office of Medical Affairs. He was one of 
the people we evacuated. I didn't have an opportunity 
to talk to him. I think he worked in number 1 World 
Trade. I'm not sure. 

There were some people we saw more towards 
the center of the courtyard that appeared to be 
trapped. One of them looked like it may have been an 
Emergency Service officer. We directed two 
firefighters and an ESU cop to go and help them. The 
last I saw of them they were in the process of removing 
that person from the rubble. I then ran into James 
Basile, EMS 2 Division Chief. He was at the end of 
this group of people. 

He indicated that he was in the lobby of 
number one and that there were some people still in the 
lobby, that there was a number of fire Chiefs in 
there. His aide was in there and that they were making 
their way out another way. He had made his way out 
from this location. He said you know we should not be 
here. We have to get out of here. I said there is no 
one else here. Let's do that, but on the way out, I 
said we are going through number 7 again. That's right 



29 
J. PERUGGIA 



on the way there. I explained to him the story. I 
said I'm sure the dust has settled somewhat. I just 
want to do another visual to make sure everyone that 
was with me and that was in that area downstairs was 
truly out . 

So we went through the foot bridge again. At 
that point, I got separated from Phil Parr. Me and Jim 
proceeded over the pedestrian bridge back into number 
7. 

Q. How did you get separated? 

A. I didn't -- I was talking to Jimmy and I saw 
Phil head off one direction. I think he headed down 
the escalators more toward Church Street. I said I'm 
going back into number 7. I was going to head back 
towards the command post, knowing that it was on Vesey 
Street. We went into the lobby. I was upstairs in the 
mezzanine lobby and there was no one there. We even 
checked the little snack store there. Everyone was 
out. No one was hidden behind the security counters. 

We made our way down the escalators, I looked 
around the lobby, everyone was out. Then we went into 
the loading bays, which were relatively clear now and 
dust free. We saw all the EMS equipment scattered all 
over the place, but there were no signs of any people 



30 
J. PERUGGIA 



in there. There was no debris in there so I knew that 
everyone in there was okay and had safely been 
evacuated . 

We walked on out to Vesey Street under the 
foot bridge and we continued westbound on Vesey towards 
West Street, walking underneath the scaffolding of the 
Verizon building. When we reached the end of the 
scaffolding, Jimmy started to continue on to the 
command post. I was talking to a fire officer and I 
asked him if he saw a group of people with some EMS 
officers. I was concerned about the location of 
Captain Nahmod and that group of people he was 
treating. He said he saw a bunch of people. He saw 
them come out and headed north on West Street. 

At that point, I believe it might have been 
Pete Hayden from the First Division that was operating 
on that corner with a number of companies. We had 
people hurt, we had people in the rubble. There were 
some ambulance crews that I saw staged on Vesey and 
West on the westbound side adjacent to number 3 World 
Financial. I guess I could mark that on your map 
number 5. I saw a Hatzolah ambulance and voluntary 
hospital ambulances. I found two or three ambulance 
crews scattered. We began to grab some of those people 



31 
J. PERUGGIA 



and move them towards the water on Vesey Street. 

I said let's get them and move them with the 
help of some firefighters, those injured people we had 
moved. All of their vehicles that were right there on 
the corner were rendered useless, as were a number of 
fire apparatus. I know I saw a collapsed unit on the 
corner over there that was crushed and dilapidated. 
There were some other vehicles over there. 

Again, I couldn't get through on the radio. 
I was standing on the corner of Vesey and West. I was 
about to make my way towards the command post. I 
noticed that the north bridge, I believe the north 
bridge, was still intact at that point. Again, you 
know, at this point things get a little cloudy. I was 
on Vesey and West. I looked up, I saw the north tower 
fully involved. I saw number 6 World Trade Center 
fully involved with fire. I started to make my way to 
the command post when I heard that horrible sound 
again, you know, that whining screeching jet engine. 

I looked up and at that point I knew the 
north tower was coming down. I made an immediate about 
face and I started to run as quick as I can. 
Q. Where were you standing exactly? 
A. West and Vesey, just south of Vesey Street on 



32 



J. PERUGGIA 



West. Maybe north of the pedestrian bridge, a couple 
of hundred feet north of the pedestrian bridge, right 
at the corner. 

I turned around and started to run north on 
West Street. My focus was run as quick as you can. 

Q. Were you there by yourself at that time? 

A. I was by myself at this point. I said this 
is it. Run for your life. 

Q. Couple of minutes earlier you saw Chief 
Hayden . Was anybody else there when you saw him? 

A. Couple of fire officers. 

Q. No other high ranking people? 

A. No, because everyone else, when I last saw 
them was still down at the command post, that's the 
direction I was headed. I was concerned about 
Zarrillo, Ganci and all those people, but at this point 
I turned off and I ran. My focus was that area two 
feet wide in front of me and 6 feet down. Nothing in 
my way. Nothing I'm going to trip over and run as fast 
as I can. 

I made it maybe a couple of hundred feet and 
I heard someone scream out, Chief, Chief. I turned my 
head to the left, I saw a firefighter, he was signaling 
me over. There was an engine and a ladder parked on 



33 
J. PERUGGIA 



the southbound lanes of West Street adjacent to the 
curb; maybe midway, probably around Barclay Street, 
midway between Vesey and Murray on that side. Probably 
around Barclay Street. So I ran in his direction. 
There was an opening maybe a foot and a half wide 
between the two apparatus. He pushed me in. He was 
behind me. He said, "We got to get under, we got to 
get under. Quick, we don't have time." He threw me to 
the floor, began to crawl under the rear, from under 
the rear step of the engine. I believe it was 23, but 
it could have been 22, the apparatus. 

Then I saw him dive to make his way 
underneath the rear of the ladder, at which point 
everything went black. The thunderous roar continued, 
for what seemed like five minutes, but it was probably 
just seconds. I was unable to breathe. I was unable 
to see. The dust was in my eyes, I had them shut. I 
couldn't breathe, I took my helmet, pulled it over my 
face to give me some confined breathing space. 

Q. Were you under the engine? 

A. I was up under the rear step of the engine, 
when I heard screaming from the direction of where the 
firefighter was. I heard some other muffled sounds and 
then everything was just still and quiet. At that 



34 
J. PERUGGIA 



point I realized I was trapped under the engine. I 
didn't think that I would ever get out. I thought that 
I was dead. I thought I was buried under a hundred 
stories of rubble under some fire truck. 

I was able to move my right leg, but I was 
unable to move my left leg. I felt a lot of weight on 
it and I couldn't really move much. All the dirt and 
dust came under, debris, so I was sort of pinned like 
this with the helmet. I tried to control my 
breathing. All sorts of things go through your head at 
that point. 

Several minutes went by. Again, I couldn't 
tell you how long. I felt some tugging on my leg. 
Next thing I know, I was pulled out from under the rig, 
it was a firefighter and an ESU cop. He said you all 
right, you all right. I said "I'm okay, I'm okay, how 
about you guys, are you okay? " I couldn't really see 
or breathe and I was choking. I walked around the side 
of the rig and popped the CFR compartment. It was open 
and I just sort of felt in there. I felt some sterile 
water bottles. I threw it on my face. Threw a couple 
of swigs to spit out all the dirt and then I realized I 
was okay. 

I realized that, I looked down and saw the 



35 
J. PERUGGIA 



devastation, the pedestrian bridge collapsed, the north 
tower collapsed, people just all over the place. 

Q. How about the other firefighter? 

A. We looked under the truck. There was a lot 
of rubble under there. We didn't see him. We didn't 
see any sign of him. So I don't know if he was all the 
way under buried. I did read a report later that they 
found some guys under trucks that were dead. I don't 
know if that was him or not. 

I started to walk north towards Murray Street 
and then I said no, let me turn around and head back to 
the command post. 

MR. CASTORINA: Before you go any further, 

why don't we switch sides on the tape before it 

stops running. It's almost over. Why don't we 

just flip sides. 

Time is now 9:15. This is side two. The 

interview continues with Chief John PERUGGIA. 

A. So, I got out of there, cleaned up my face. 
I was able to see and breathe. I offered water to a 
number of firefighters and police officers that were in 
the area. They all took some of the water and cleaned 
off their face a little. I went back to the CFR 
compartment, grabbed some more water. I threw it to 



36 
J. PERUGGIA 



the guys, grabbed a pair of gloves for my hands and 
also grabbed some 6 inch cling, wrapped it around my 
face to give me some breathing protection. 

I started to walk north towards Murray 
Street, maybe ten or 20 steps. I said, you know, let 
me go back to the command post instead of wandering 
around helplessly. I'm sure that things are chaotic 
now. I made the turn, I started to walk south towards 
Vesey Street and saw that -- 

Q. How heavy was the rubble at that point, in 
that location? 

A. It was pretty significant. Actually it was 
like the more south I proceeded, the more and more 
rubble there was. Huge amount of fire, smoke, saw the 
pedestrian bridge collapse and at that point I had no 
idea where the command post now was. If there even was 
a command post. I turned around and started to walk 
north. I noticed, on the northbound direction of West 
Street, a Suburban. It was running because the lights 
were on, couple of hundred feet north of where I was. 
So, I figured let me make my way over there. Maybe 
there are some radios I could use and talk to somebody. 

Q. At this point the whereabouts of OEM were? 

A. Everyone was scattered. 



37 
J. PERUGGIA 



Q. Last they were by 7? 

A. We were all in there. I knew that they all 
got out. All the people that were there with us. 

Q. At this point Chief Ganci, you had no idea -- 

A. I had no idea about Chief Ganci. No idea 
about him. The last time I saw Nigro he was on the 
other side of the complex. I didn't know where EMT 
Zarrillo was. I know that my last direction to him was 
go to Ganci. I was clearly concerned about him. 
Besides the fact that I directed him, he works for me. 
We are friends for some 15 years and I am friends with 
his wife longer and I was really concerned about him. 
I didn't know where Captain Nahmod was. Again, I had 
directed him and again we were friends and I had those 
concerns as well. 

I started making my way towards this Suburban 
vehicle. It was an EMS Suburban, the star of life was 
on the rear window. I ran into Mike Butler, Chief of 
Fire Prevention. He was making his way south. I said 
Chief are you all right. He said yes, how about you. 
I said fine. I said where is the command post, because 
everything down there is destroyed now. He said the 
command post is wiped out; everyone is gone. He said 
we need to set up a command post. It's just me and you 



38 
J. PERUGGIA 



so let's get started. 

At that point we proceeded north to Murray 
Street. He was on the fire radio. I ran over, grabbed 
the EMS Suburban, pulled up to Murray Street, was 
trying to get through on the radio. I finally got 
through when we decided that we were going to set up 
the command post on Warren, bring it one block north. 
I got through on the radio, I asked about the command 
post. They said they had no communications with 
anyone. I told them I was on the scene and proceeding 
to set up a command post on Warren Street. 

I don't know if that message got through, 
because after we got on Warren Street, we ran into Joe 
Farrell from the New York State Health Department, EMS 
Bureau. He said, "Where are you headed?" I said, 
"Well this is the command post." Then the Chief says, 
"There is a gas leak, we need to go north one more to 
Chambers." I said, "Come on Joe, we will drive up 
there." We drove up to Chambers Street, right under 
the little Stuyvesant High School bridge. I parked the 
Suburban there and determined that that would be my 
command post. Chief Butler came up and there was a 
fire car that they had over there. He started setting 
up. I was trying to get through on Citywide. There 



39 
J. PERUGGIA 



was a lot of activity. 

At some point I heard an EMS Chief officer, 
later to find out that was J. P. Martin and he was here 
on the Brooklyn side on the Brooklyn Bridge and he was 
assuming command of the operation, directing units 
staged in Brooklyn. I guess his impression was that no 
one was talking to them. They thought everyone in the 
Trade Center was wiped out. They didn't know what was 
going on. I was able to cut in on Citywide. I asked 
him to hit the alert tone. I remember asking him to 
hit the alert tone several times to clear the 
frequency. 

I indicated to them that unless there was a 
higher ranking officer than myself that they were in 
contact with, I was on scene at the World Trade Center 
and was establishing the EMS command post adjacent to 
the Fire Department command post at Chambers Street. 
So they sent that message out several times. I told 
them that any officers that were operating on the scene 
should immediately be directed to report in to Chambers 
and West. Any ambulance crews that they had contact 
with that were operating in the vicinity, I asked them 
to have them respond in to West Broadway and Chambers, 
which was two blocks to the east of where we were 



40 
J. PERUGGIA 



located . 

They sent that message out several times. 
Further, I tried to get them to conduct a roll call of 
the Chief officers so I know who was accounted for, 
where they may be and what types of operations. I also 
remember asking to them if they had contact with any 
officers or ambulances that were operating, to get them 
identified and where they were. I wanted to try to get 
some sense of scope on what sort of management people 
and/or supervisory people were on the scene, where they 
were and what people were doing. Again, there was 
tremendous disaster area down there. It was out of 
control and we didn't know what was going on. 

Some time went by. We were trying to collect 
resources. Some ambulances showed up. I directed them 
up there. A couple of supervisors arrived and I 
directed one up to staging. I sent two people, I don't 
remember who they were, I asked them to just make their 
way down to Vesey Street and no further and if they saw 
anyone operating around there to get them up, get them 
out of there. I know there were people operating on 
Vesey Street prior to the second collapse. I said, "I 
want you to go down there, do a quick survey, your 
safety obviously first. If you find anybody get them 



41 
J. PERUGGIA 



up here. Let's get away from the site and let's 
regroup and we will go in there." Chief Butler I think 
was trying to do the same thing for fire. 

I started to get some sense from Citywide. 
J. P. Martin had a group of people in Brooklyn. There 
was a group of people at South Ferry, I think it was 
Chief Steffens and I don't remember who else was down 
there. They told me that there was a group of people 
up at Chelsea Piers with Kowalczyk and Pat 
Scaringello. This was are time progressed. 

I ran into Pete Carrasquillo, maybe after 
about 20, 30 minutes. He was down near the water on 
Chambers Street. He heard me on the radio and he said 
he made his way down towards Vesey Street. I said, 
"Pete, maybe you can make your way down there, get a 
forward seat and see what's going on." J. P. Martin 
eventually made his way to me. I made him then become 
the communications person for the operation post. I 
got in touch with Kowalczyk, maybe an hour or two 
later, to see if I could get him down. 

I knew I was hurt. There was blood dripping 
down the side of my face. I was a little dazed and 
confused and I hadn't spoken to my family since when I 
first started responding in. I was concerned about the 



42 
J. PERUGGIA 



two guys who worked for me that were my friends as well 
as other people and I said I have a task in front of 
me, but I just needed some help. I reached out to 
Walter to get him down. It was a while before Walter 
got down. We continued the operation. We started to 
set up some sectors and started sometime shortly about 
maybe one o'clock or two o'clock or whatever. Both of 
us said, "You look like you are shot." He said, "Do 
you want me to do command and you do operations? " We 
then switched roles. 

At some point after that we found out that 
McCracken was okay. He made his way back up towards, 
we started to regroup and implement some sort of 
operational plans about how we were going to do the 
operation . 

Q. This whole time, did you see Chief McCracken? 

A. I didn't see Chief McCracken until much 
later, maybe one or two o'clock. It was evening, and 
it was dark so I don't know what time, as time 
progressed we set up sectors. I had John McFarland go 
down to Vesey and West Street, with a team of guys to 
do forward triage. I got a communication from John. 
He called me on his cell phone, indicating that they 
found Ganci and Feehan ' s bodies. 



43 
J. PERUGGIA 



I relayed that information to Chief 
McCracken. We got out of our command post and I walked 
over and relayed that to, I believe it was Chief Nigro 
and the Fire Commissioner, who were at the fire command 
post at that point in time. At that point, you know, I 
was really concerned about Rich Zarrillo. I hadn't 
heard -- 

Q. Still you hadn't heard? 

A. Right, and I knew he was there. I ran into 
Abdo at some point. He didn't know where Rich was. 

Q. When did you finally find Rich Zarrillo? 

A. Probably around 6:00. I didn't see Richie 
till after. Chief Hirth and Lieutenant Cacciola made 
their way down or way up from South Street at some 
point in time. They said that they saw Richie and he 
was at Chelsea Piers. At that point I knew that he was 
okay. 

We continued the operation. I was there 
until 8:30 the next morning. 

Q. Did you see Father Judge at any point? 

A. I never saw Father Judge. The only ranking 
people I saw were Ganci and Nigro at the command post, 
the Fire Commissioner, who I briefed early on and 
obviously saw later on. 



44 
J. PERUGGIA 



Q. Okay. Anything else you want to add? 

A. I just marked the map number 6, the location 
where I guess I was underneath the fire truck. 
Somewhere between Vesey and Murray around Barclay. 

Q. On the second collapse? 

A. Right, it was either 22 or 23 engine, I don't 
remember exactly, and some truck company. 

MR. CASTORINA: Okay. This concludes the 

interview. The time now is 0926 hours. Thank 

you, Chief PERUGGIA. 



File No. 9110161 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMT RICHARD ZARRILLO 
Interview Date: October 25, 2001 



Transcribed by Nancy Francis 



R. ZARRILLO 

MR. CASTORINA: Today's date is October 25th, 
2001. I'm Ron Castorina conducting an interview in the 
office of BITS. Your name -- 

MR. McCOURT: Tom McCourt. 

MR. CASTORINA: --is also accompanied with 
me conducting this interview. 

Q. Your name, sir? 

A. Richard Zarrillo. 

Q. And your rank and title? 

A. I'm an EMT working in fire operations as the 
special event coordinator. 

Q. Can you tell me, on September 11th, 2001, the 
events that took place that day, whatever you can 
remember? 

A. Sure. While sitting at my desk, probably 
just after the first plane had hit the tower, Chief 
Ganci had come running across the hall yelling 
something about a plane hitting the twin towers. Most 
of us thought he was joking until we looked out the 
window and saw one of the towers had flames coming out 
of it . I placed a call to Chief Peruggia to ask him 
his location. He told me he was just coming over the 
Verrazano Bridge about to get in the HOV lane. I told 
him maybe you want to start heading to Manhattan, I'll 



R. ZARRILLO 

meet you in the city, this way we could hook up and do 
whatever we needed to do. At that point he thought I 
was joking. He cursed at me and hung up. Captain 
Nahmod was sitting next to me and he said we need to 
get some equipment, find out who's going, who's not 
going, try and make our way there. 

I spoke with Chief Peruggia. He called me 
back and said maybe you and Abdo, Captain Nahmod, need 
to head into the city to be part of the command, 
runners or administratively, whatever we can do to help 
out. I was able to locate a helmet from one of the 
people in RCC. Captain Nahmod and I tried to find a 
car to get into the city. Chief Ramos was bringing us 
downstairs to get a pool car, so I think Commissioner 
Drury happened to be walking in at the wrong time and 
we asked him to drive us into the city. 

I'm not sure of the exact time, but I believe 
as we were coming over the Brooklyn Bridge was when the 
second plane hit the second tower. We parked -- I want 
to say it's on like Broadway right off of Vesey Street, 
between Vesey and Barclay. Captain Nahmod and I 
started heading down Vesey Street towards where we 
thought the command post would be. At that time we had 
received a page per Chief Peruggia to go into OEM at 



R. ZARRILLO 

No. 7 World Trade and activate our post in OEM. 
Captain Nahmod and I were running down Vesey Street 
stepping over airplane pieces, several bodies and 
whatnot . 

Q. Can you describe how much debris was around? 

A. There was what looked like the front wheel 
assembly of an airplane. Unknown the size of the plane 
that had hit, it just looked like it was one pair of 
wheels on an assembly, pieces of metal with rivets in 
them, a few body parts scattered around. 

Q. Was debris still falling? 

A. Debris was falling. It looked like birds. 
There were people falling from the towers or jumping, 
whatever it was they were doing. Abdo and I went into 
No. 7, activated OEM, placed calls to EMS Citywide, 
RCC, to tell them we were there and we were activated. 

Maybe five, ten minutes, not even ten minutes 
later, a rep from OEM came into the main room and said 
we need to evacuate the building; there's a third plane 
inbound. That was the only thing I really heard 
because I said, Abdo, we've got to go, and we made it 
down to the lobby of the building, street level, met up 
with Chief Peruggia in the lobby of the building. He 
said that there was no third plane but we needed to 



R. ZARRILLO 

re-establish OEM right there so we can coordinate what 
was going on. He had already been to the command post, 
so he told us, and he was trying to release people back 
to be operational. He was looking for the Fire guy to 
go back in. He was there with Captain Yakimovich . In 
OEM with Captain Nahmod and I was Chief Maggio, who is 
now retired, and another firefighter from the 1st 
Division. We were really trying to establish OEM and a 
treatment sector in the lobby of the building because 
there were people coming around us. 

Again, times are a little fuzzy initially for 
me. A few minutes later, John came to me and said you 
need to go find Chief Ganci and relay the following 
message: that the buildings have been compromised, we 
need to evacuate, they're going to collapse. I said 
okay. I went down Vesey Street towards West. 

Q. You were by yourself? 

A. I was by myself, me and my helmet and my 
radio. I got to the corner of Vesey and West. I found 
some EMS vehicles. I think I saw Chief Gombo there. 
I'm not really sure. I mentioned to the EMS people 
there, again, not knowing who they were, I said you 
need to get away from here, the building might 
collapse, we need to leave this spot. 



R. ZARRILLO 

As I was walking towards the Fire command 
post, I found Steve Mosiello. I said, Steve, where 's 
the boss? I have to give him a message. He said, 
well, what's the message? I said the buildings are 
going to collapse; we need to evac everybody out. With 
a very confused look he said who told you that? I said 
I was just with John at OEM. OEM says the buildings 
are going to collapse; we need to get out. 

He escorted me over to Chief Ganci. He said, 
hey, Pete, we got a message that the buildings are 
going to collapse. His reply was who the fuck told you 
that? Then Steve brought me in and with Chief Ganci, 
Commissioner Feehan, Steve, I believe Chief Turi was 
initially there, I said, listen, I was just at OEM. 
The message I was given was that the buildings are 
going to collapse; we need to get our people out. At 
that moment, this thunderous, rolling roar came down 
and that's when the building came down, the first tower 
came down . 

The command post was situated right in front 
of 3 World Financial, the American Express Building. 
The garage was open and as that rumble started and we 
saw it was coming down, the firemen that were in the 
command area, I believe most of the chiefs, we all ran 



R. ZARRILLO 

into the garage of that building. It became dark, hard 
to breathe. Nobody had any equipment because most of 
the firemen dropped everything as they were running. 
It became an obstacle course to get into the garage. 
Again, it's sketchy with time, but it may 
have been anywhere from ten to 20 minutes by the time 
we found an emergency exit to get out of the building. 
It was dark. There was no light. 

Q. Who were you with at this point? Were you by 
yourself? 

A. I had two firemen. What I did was I took 
about ten or 15 running steps into the garage and 
hugged into a corner of a wall, an indentation, and I 
felt like two or three guys get in behind me and 
actually made it a tighter huddle. The dust, the cloud 
came rolling in. It got dark. As the dust and the 
noise started to settle, we were all tapping up to see 
where each other were. 

I met up with Chief Cassano at the stairwell, 
and I believe Chief Carrasquillo was around there. I 
know I met up with him outside on the lobby of Vesey 
Street from that building, when we got out. Lots of 
firemen, you know, faces, no names I could really 
identify, except for Sal. 



R. ZARRILLO 

We made it up the staircase into the lobby, I 
believe it was 3, it may have been one of those little 
cross lobbies that were there, and got out onto Vesey 
Street. I met up with EMT Mike Ober, who had been 
driving Chief Kowalczyk. He was his driver for a 
while. I met up with him. I found Chief Carrasquillo, 
who was with Chief Cassano, a few others, you know, 
faces, again, that I found, and we were walking around 
trying to make -- what happened? It was still cloudy, 
that very fine but heavy dust that was in the air. 

Once I got out of the building, maybe ten 
minutes from there, that unforgettable rolling started. 

Q. The same sound you heard earlier? 

A. The same sound I heard earlier. 

Q. Where were you at this point? 

A. I was on West and Vesey, probably in the 
middle of the intersection, trying to find people that 
I knew. At this point I didn't know where John was, 
where Abdo was. I don't know what happened to No. 7. 
I knew the building was coming down. I watched it come 
down on us, but I don't know where anybody else is. 

As that roar was happening on the second time 
around, I was running down Vesey Street towards the 
water with a few thoughts in my head. One, if I hit 



R. ZARRILLO 

the water, I was swimming home, or just getting into 
the water for cover, if necessary. The marina was 
right there. I ended up making a right on North End 
Avenue and there was a building -- EMS, again, I know 
Chief Villani was there. I saw Chief Pascale later 
on. I believe Chief Kowalczyk was in there also. The 
MERV was stationed on North End Avenue for a while and 
I remember emergency service was on the southbound side 
of North End near Vesey for a while also. We made it 
into that building as the second one came down. Again, 
the clouds and all the other debris. 

Q. You were protected in that building? 

A. In the building. 

Q. Which building was that? 

A. There was a building right there on the 
corner. Maybe 15, 20 feet off the corner, there was an 
entrance into a building, and that's where --it was 
mostly glass windows and we were concerned that the 
glass was going to implode. 

Q. Did that face the river? 

A. It faced the river and that was protection in 
my view. 

Q. About a three-block distance? 

A. It's actually one city block, but still that 



10 

R. ZARRILLO 



cloud came over and passed and -- 

Q. Did it get black there, too? 

A. It got really dark. Most of us were looking 
for cover, trying to avoid anything else that was 
coming down. While we were in that building, we were 
told -- again, I don't know where anybody is. 

Q. You had no radio, right? 

A. I had a 4QQ radio. I couldn't get through to 
anybody. 

Q. Were you hearing anything, Mayday, anything 
on the radio? 

A. No. The 400 -- I was on EMS Citywide and I 
don't know if my radio was clogged or the batteries. 
It could have been a hundred different things. 

Q. Can you just mark on the map where you were? 
Just roughly. 

A. We were right about here. 

Q. Okay. 

A. I didn't know where John was. Outside of the 
job, John, Abdo and I are old friends and that was my 
concern, you know, how am I going to tell these guys' 
wives, we all live near each other, that I followed his 
direction and now I can't find either of them. 

While we were in this building, we were told 



11 

R. ZARRILLO 



that there was a gas main rupture or a gas leak and we 
needed to evacuate that building. 

Q. Who told you this? 

A. It was just somebody, a security guard or 
somebody. But then Chief Villani and all the other 
chiefs that were in there said we need to gather all of 
our equipment because they had set up a treatment area, 
there were ten sets of equipment with stretchers from 
ambulances, and we all took all that stuff out and 
started heading down North End hoping to find -- or 
maybe it was down toward -- no. Down North End Avenue 
to try and find another place we could go into. 

Again, at this point there was a lot of 
disorientation. Nobody really was fully aware as to 
what was going on. The radios had gone silent, you 
know, guessing, because the repeater tower went down. 
Nobody knew what was going on. I thought I heard a 
helicopter. There were a lot of people running, lots 
of patients or would-be patients running past us. 

Q. Where were they headed? 

A. Anywhere they could get away from. The 
water . 

Q. Heading away from the buildings? 

A. Running north on West Street. I went into -- 



12 
R. ZARRILLO 



there was a school not too far down from here. I meet 
up with Mike Cahill from Division 6 and Gerald Garcia. 
They were down there. The MERV had already tried to 
find another place to set up and was moving down North 
End Avenue. I think it was Garcia. We went into a 
school. I wanted to just wash my face off, use a 
bathroom, and as we were in that school building, we 
were told we had to evacuate that building because, 
again, a gas rupture. That came from one of the school 
officials, a name I couldn't tell you. Face? Probably 
not now recognize. 

We made it back on to West Street, I don't 
remember what the cross was, and we started heading -- 
I heard people saying we're going to Chelsea. I heard 
Chief Pascale say she was going up to Chelsea Piers, we 
were going to try and re-establish up there, you know, 
do a count and try to run the operation. 

When I went to that other building, I lost 
most of those people, except for Cahill, and then when 
they told us to evacuate that building, I just had to 
get out of there. My thoughts were that I needed to 
get home, get my wife from midtown and just get home 
for my daughter. 

I got onto West Street and met up with 



13 



R. ZARRILLO 



Captain Stone, Greg Brady from Division 1. I found 
Chief Hirth and Grace Cacciola and they said we're all 
going up to Chelsea, let's go re-establish our command 
up there, again, not knowing where anybody else was. 
You see the plumes of smoke, the dust cloud that was 
coming down, but we just really wanted to find a safe 
place for that. Probably about ten blocks up West 
Street you heard the jets flying overhead, so lots of 
thoughts running through people's heads, what's 
happening to us here? 

Q. What kind of jets? 

A. Military jets. 

Q. Military jets? 

A. Yes. 

Q. This is -- 

A. This is right after the second collapse. 

Q. After the second collapse? 

A. Well, if I say 15 minutes from the time we 
got to that school building and started walking towards 
Chelsea, maybe ten, 15 minutes had passed by the time 
that -- 

Q. Half an hour? 

A. Again, I do apologize for that. 

Q. No, everybody has that problem. 



14 
R. ZARRILLO 



A. Time wasn't -- 

Q. There's no perception of time. 

A. It's still very surreal. There I was talking 
to Chief Ganci and relaying that the building is going 
to come down and then it came down on us. It's very 
bothersome. 

We hitched a ride with a police van up to the 
Chelsea Piers. Chief Kowalczyk was there, Chief 
Pascale, a slew of ambulances. There had to be 50 non 
city ambulances up there from everywhere. I saw 
Captain Boyle there. I met up with Captain Pinkus. 
Captain Stone, myself, Brady, Chief Hirth and Grace 
went into the -- there was some restaurant on the edge 
of the Chelsea Pier area, you know, to try and clean up 
a little bit, use the rest room, which I needed to do a 
while ago. I met up with a lot of my counterparts from 
the Secret Service because that's where their fallback 
was becoming. All their agents from the building were 
in there. 

Mark Stone said he felt his shoulder was hurt 
and Chief Hirth was looking to get out of there to go 
someplace else. He wanted to check -- I honestly don't 
know what was going through his head. He said I need 
to go away from here, I need to go get a car, I need to 



15 
R. ZARRILLO 



go to the division or a hospital. Whatever the case 
may have been, they took Captain Stone to Bellevue to 
be treated. He was treated and released. 

Chief Pascale and Chief Kowalczyk were 
establishing their command, and doing this for -- you 
know, between chiefs and what I do now, I fell into 
that command structure to say, okay, I'm here, let me 
help you with this, and I handled staging and some 
other logistical issues with them for about two or 
three hours, and then I made my way back down to the 
command post. Probably within an hour of us getting up 
to Chelsea, Chief Kowalczyk said to me that John is 
okay, he heard him on the radio, and that he was going 
down to the command post that's been re-established to 
either help out or take over from him. 

Then, like I said, a few hours later, 
Lieutenant Nevins and I made our way down south back to 
Chambers Street where the other command post had been 
established. That's really about it. 

MR. CASTORINA: I think you've covered 
virtually everything. The time now is 1202. The 
concludes the interview. 



File No. 9110162 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

EMT JULIO MARRERO 

Interview Date: October 25, 2001 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



J. MARRERO 2 

MS. BASTEDENBECK: Today is October 
25th, 2001. The time now is 1849 hours. My 
name is Christine Bastedenbeck. I work with 
the New York City Fire Department, assigned 
to the World Trade Center Task Force. I'm 
at Battalion 14 to conduct an interview with 
the following individual. 

Please state your name, rank, 
assignment and shield number. 

EMT MARRERO: My name is Julio Marrero 
with the New York City Fire Department, 
Battalion 14. I was assigned to 14 Charlie 
that day, tour 2, and my shield number is 
5376. 

MS. BASTEDENBECK: Also present for the 
interview is -- 

MR. ECCLESTON: Christopher Eccleston 
of the New York City Fire Department, World 
Trade Center Task Force. 
Q. Mr. Marrero, on the morning of 
September 11th can you recount the events that 
took place that day? 

A. Sure. I was sitting on 161 and Grand 
Concourse approximately about 9:30 in the morning 



J. MARRERO 3 

when a call came over on my KDT to respond over 
to Barclay and Church for a cardiac, most 
probably related to the World Trade Center 
incident . 

As I was heading down to the World 
Trade Center, I saw a massive amount of people 
walking away from the building, and I saw smoke 
coming from both towers. I knew that one tower 
was hit, never knew that the second tower was 
hit. 

I responded over to Barclay and Church 
where I came around and I couldn't actually get 
around to Barclay street because the roads were 
so closed off because of the amount of people 
walking in the streets. We couldn't actually 
make our turn on Barclay to get over to Church, 
so I went down a few blocks. I can't remember 
exact blocks that I went down; I would say two to 
three blocks, because everything was blocked off. 

I finally got over to Church. When I 
saw Church Street, I looked up, and both towers 
were in flames. At this point we realized that 
something was terribly wrong. I looked down the 
block and saw that there must have been more than 



J. MARRERO 4 

three dozen ambulances, fire trucks and police 
cars on the street and a massive amount of rescue 
workers, firefighters, EMS, police officers, 
trying to get these people away from the 
buildings. 

Also I was told to pull my ambulance 
over by one of the lieutenants so I could help to 
start triaging with the casualties and stuff. I 
was trying to explain to the lieutenant on the 
scene that I was trying to get to a call, an 
actual call that was on Barclay and Church, and 
he told me I can mark that a 93 because there was 
too many amount of buses, ambulances, to even 
worry about me trying to get over that way. 
Actually all the street was closed because of so 
many rescue ambulances and stuff. So it was kind 
of hard. 

In that process of him trying to 
explain to me to pull my ambulance over, I heard 
a loud bang. We looked up, and we just saw the 
building starting to collapse. I looked over and 
started to scream at my partner, which he was 
inside the vehicle. 

Q. Who was your partner that day? 



J. MARRERO 5 

A. My partner was Naomi Nacional. 

I was screaming from the top of my 
lungs, and I must have been about ten feet away 
from her and she couldn't even hear me, because 
the building was so loud, the explosion, that she 
couldn't even hear me. I just saw everybody 
running; and she saw us running, and she took off 
behind us. 

Q. You left your vehicle right there? 

A. The vehicle was left there. 

Q. Do you know approximately where it was? 

A. The vehicle was approximately between I 
believe -- I would say between Liberty -- I'm not 
sure. Between Liberty and Dey, somewhere in that 
vicinity. We're talking about two blocks. I 
can't remember exactly because I was trying to 
actually make my way up to Barclay and Church. 

Q. Would you just indicate on the map with 
the number 1 approximately where you remember 
leaving the vehicle when you got out to run. 

A. I believe it was maybe over here. I 
think I ran down Dey. I think I ran down Dey. 
I'm not sure if I ran down Dey because, like I 
said, I couldn't move my vehicle anyway because 



J. MARRERO 6 

there was so many vehicles in the way that we 
couldn't move our vehicle. This happened in such 
a split second that the only thing we had to do 
to react was run for our dear lives. 

I saw fire trucks. I saw firemen. I 
saw firemen walking in the building as this 
horrific -- 

Q. You want to pause? 
(Pause. ) 
MS. BASTEDENBECK: The interview will 

be continuing the time now is 1856 hours. 

Q. You left off you left the vehicle and 
started to run. 

A. We started to run. I remember running 
either down Dey or Cortlandt. I'm not sure which 
street it was. It happened too fast. I can't 
remember . 

In the event that the building was 
coming down, I also saw a massive amount of 
people running. The dark cloud hit us. I 
thought I was going to be dead. I thought I was 
going to die when that smoke hit us. I could see 
debris flying, and I started choking from the 
smoke because I couldn't breathe. 



J. MARRERO 7 

I fell down some subway stairs. 
Somewhere I had just started walking towards -- I 
knew that there was a building on my right as I 
was running, and I knew that I had to find a void 
in the building so I wouldn't be hit over the 
head with any debris as I was running. 

I was crawling on the side of the 
building, and I felt a void. That's when I took 
a step into the void, and there was actually 
steps. Because you couldn't see your hand in 
front of you, it was so dark. A thick cloud of 
concrete, debris, smoke, airplane fuel. It was 
just massive thickness. 

I remember there was a void, and I 
stumbled down the stairs of this void. That's 
when I broke my foot. I broke my foot, and I did 
feel some pressure on my foot. My boots were 
kind of tight on me, and I felt them getting 
tighter. 

All I was thinking at that moment is 
how am I going to get out of this situation. 
That was my first concern. I had to worry about 
myself because of my safety. This is one of the 
things that they taught us at the academy is try 



J. MARRERO 8 

to worry about yourself first so then you can 
help other people. So I was really worried about 
trying to get out of the situation I was in so I 
could get out and start helping people. 

I didn't really feel my foot as much as 
I felt my back, because as I fell down the stairs 
I sprained my lower back, mostly, and that was 
even more. At the bottom of the stairs, I just 
waited a little while. I could hear people 
screaming inside the subway station from a 
distance. It was horrifying. It was really 
horrifying. The screams I still hear at night. 

I ran out of the subway station to get 
help. As I ran out of the subway station, I ran 
down to about -- I believe the street that I ran 
down was to Broadway. I'm not sure -- I believe 
I was on Dey, but I'm not sure if it was Dey or 
Cortlandt, because a lot of the signs were also 
full of dust. So I really couldn't see that 
well. 

I had contacts on that day, and my eyes 
were full of dust and they were irritated and I 
was completely head to toe in this dust and 
concrete and God knows what else we were exposed 



J. MARRERO 9 

to. I was really worried about my breathing, 
because I had choked up a lot of that dust and 
stuff. 

Miraculously I saw my partner walking 
towards me. We embraced for a moment, we were 
just so glad to see each other. Once I turned 
around -- I was on the corner I think of Dey or 
Cortlandt on Broadway. I remember Broadway. I 
looked, and it was just an amount of overwhelming 
people that needed help, and I didn't have an 
ambulance. The ambulance was left back on Church 
Street, I believe, or Trinity, Church and Trinity 
turns into that, I'm sure. 

This is where I then started to help 
people to the best that I could. And I felt that 
I needed to go back and try to get my ambulance. 
So my partner and I started to work towards the 
collapsed buildings, and this is when I saw the 
chaplain. I believe it's Father Judge. I 
believe he was there. There was another chief 
with him. I can't remember who the chief was. 
But I remember looking at the chaplain because he 
had his coat on, and on the bottom of the coat it 
said "chaplain." That's how I remember it was 



J. MARRERO 10 

the chaplain. 

I saw them walking towards the 
collapsed building, and that's when me and my 
partner decided to walk behind them to see if we 
can go get our ambulance so we can start 
transporting people to the hospital. 

When I really got this really deep sick 
feeling inside of my stomach, and I said, "Look, 
I don't think we can go back and get the 
ambulance. I think that ambulance is destroyed." 
As we were walking towards there, we just saw so 
much fire and smoke. It was a horrifying scene, 
and I really felt that the scene was not safe for 
me to go back towards that way. 

So we turned around and headed back to 
help people. So we were making a triage right in 
the middle of -- we made a triage right on the 
street of Broadway and I believe it was Dey. 
Broadway and Dey, we started helping people right 
there on the corner. We started setting up a 
triage area right there. 

There were no bosses. There was no 
one. There was just me. Then a couple of 
ambulances pulled up, and we just started loading 



J. MARRERO 11 

people into the ambulances. It was mayhem. From 
that moment on, it was just mayhem, everybody 
walking up to us and they were hurt some way or 
another . 

Then we were helping these people, 
loading them up to the ambulance, when I heard 
over citywide -- I had my radio on. I heard over 
citywide that the second tower was leaning south, 
to start heading people north, it was about to 
go. 

So as soon as I heard that over the 
radio, my partner was inside an ambulance trying 
to help people with the other EMTs, and I was 
trying to work with the people outside the 
ambulance. 

When I heard that, I had told my 
partner to get out of the ambulance, to start 
heading people north, and you could tell north 
from south by looking at the tower that was still 
standing and you knew more or less where you 
were. Because if you were on Broadway and you 
looked at the tower, the north tower, you wanted 
to run behind it. 

I started telling her to start telling 



J. MARRERO 12 

people to start moving north, and we both 
started -- and I realized that the ambulance, 
they were still in there trying to work on 
people. So I ran towards the ambulance, and my 
partner ran away from the ambulance, telling 
people to run north, because they were all 
walking toward the ambulance, because there was 
only one ambulance in the area and everybody was 
needing so much desperate help that they were all 
working towards the ambulance. 

We started telling them to move north. 
She ran to tell them to move north, and I ran 
towards the ambulance to get them out of there, 
because they had no idea what was going on. 

When I got to the ambulance, I told 
them to leave because they just said over 
citywide that the building was about to collapse, 
the second collapse. They just got out and 
moved. They moved that bus. I have no idea 
which way they went. 

At that moment I just heard the second 
building coming down. When the second building 
started to come down, I started to run. 
Approximately I'm not sure what street. I must 



J. MARRERO 13 

have ran down Fulton Street about a block, and 
then I know I cut down another street. I made a 
left. And I just started cutting between streets 
like a snake in order to avoid any kind of debris 
or anything trying to hit me. I ran into one of 
the buildings that was open about two blocks 
down. 

At this point I was in extreme pain 
from my lower back. My heart rate was over 200. 
My adrenaline was very high. My blood pressure, 
I have no idea how high it was, but it was 
extremely high. I was very nervous. I felt that 
I might have had -- was going to experience a 
heart attack. 

As I opened the building door, I just 
saw inside the building there must have been 
about 30 or 40 people inside that building 
hiding. There was just a lot of fear. And when 
they saw me in uniform, everybody was like "Help 
me." I was like, I'm trying to help myself right 
now. 

There was another police officer in the 
building also. I believe he was a bike cop, 
because he had his little bike uniform on and I 



J. MARRERO 14 

could tell the police officers that have the 
little bike uniform on. It was just me and him 
trying to calm the people down inside the 
building and trying to get them away from the 
collapse. 

We just waited for the smoke to clear 
some. We got them out. That building had an 
exit on the other side from where I came in. We 
opened that exit. We got them out of the 
building, and we all ran to safety. 

I ran over to Beekman Hospital, where I 
practically collapsed. I needed oxygen treatment 
at Beekman. I can tell you that at Beekman I saw 
police officers and firemen coming in, and they 
were -- some people were beyond recognition. 

I was in Beekman Hospital on a 
stretcher for some oxygen treatment when I saw a 
cop friend of mine from the 44 Precinct come in, 
and he had his head busted wide open. I realized 
that this cop needed a stretcher more than I did. 
There were no stretchers. So I jumped off and I 
said, "Put that police officer on my stretcher." 

I jumped onto another ambulance going 
to Bellevue Hospital, from Beekman, because they 



J. MARRERO 15 

needed to transport a patient who was in severe 
head trauma, severe head trauma, intubated, going 
from Beekman to Bellevue. I took the opportunity 
to help those EMTs transport this patient from 
Beekman Hospital over to Bellevue Hospital. 

This man must have weighed about a good 
450 pounds. He had massive head trauma. I don't 
think -- this patient was pretty much close to 
death when we transported him. I helped them 
load this patient, with a bad back, with a broken 
foot. My adrenaline is still going. 

I never even thought about going back 
towards the building. I didn't want to go back 
towards that way, because I knew I was injured 
and I needed to get out of the area. 

We got that patient over to Bellevue 
Hospital, and they treated him. The EMTs, they 
told me that they didn't want me going back to 
look for my partner because I was injured, and 
they wanted me in. As soon as I got to Bellevue 
Hospital, they grabbed a lieutenant and told them 
what was going on with me. 

That's when I just broke down and cried 
at Bellevue Hospital, because it was just so 



J. MARRERO 16 

overwhelming. I just knew that what happened was 
horrific. It was a bombing. It wasn't an 
accident. I didn't know what was going on. I 
had no idea, no clue that two airplanes had hit 
the building. 

I was responding right after like -- I 
would say after one plane hit the building. I 
wasn't even listening to a radio, but I was only 
listening to my EMS radio, not listening to 1010 
Wins or anything like that, you know, where you 
can get information. I had no idea what was 
going on downtown. I was responding to a call. 
That's basically my story. 

Q. Is there anything else you'd like to 
add? 

A. No. 

MS. BASTEDENBECK: This concludes our 

interview. The time is 1910 hours. 



File No. 9110163 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

CHARLES WELLS 

Interview Date: October 25, 2001 



Transcribed by Maureen McCormick 



MR. DUN: Today is October 26, 2001. The 
time is 1118 hours. I'm Richard Dun of the New 
York City Fire Department, working with Marisa 
Abbriano, also from the New York City Fire 
Department, conducting an interview with Deputy 
Chief CHARLES WELLS. 

Q. Sir, would you give us the story of what 
happened on September 11, 2001. 

A. I logged on, I guess, approximately 8:30 in 
the morning. I was proceeding westbound on the 
Southern State Parkway in the vicinity of the state 
troopers barracks in Valley Stream when the citywide 
radio started becoming extremely busy with radio 
traffic, Brooklyn and Manhattan units coming up into 
the citywide radio, saying 1063, but after a few 
minutes I realized they were going to the World Trade 
Center . 

Immediately got on the radio and requested 
permission to respond, and I was -- I received 
permission to respond and proceeded north on the Cross 
Island Parkway to the westbound LIE, where I approached 
what used to be the Elmhurst gas tanks area. I was 
able to view the Manhattan skyline to see a tower 
involved in fire on the upper floors. 



CHARLES WELLS 

Went through the Midtown Tunnel. When I 
exited the Midtown Tunnel, at that time a radio message 
came over that a second tower had been struck by an 
airplane. 

I proceeded through midtown traffic, got over 
to the west side, and parked my car on the southbound 
side of West Street at Barclay. There were numerous 
ambulances parked nearby there, numerous marked fire 
sedans, and I got out, I put on my gear and started 
walking toward where I believe the command post was, at 
Vesey and West . 

As I was walking down the street, there was 
numerous apparatus. I did see Ladder 118 parked at 
that --on West at Vesey. I then proceeded south of 
Vesey on West toward the command post, where I reported 
in to Chief Kowalczyk and Chief Basile, at which point 
they directed me to go to the southwest sector of the 
complex at Liberty and West Street and establish some 
medical treatment triage center. 

As I was walking down, numerous people on the 
upper floors were jumping, jumping in pairs, holding 
hands, jumping, and they were landing -- they were 
landing on the ground, and then on -- also on top of 
the Vista International Hotel. 



CHARLES WELLS 

I got down to Liberty and West. When I 
arrived there, there were approximately 15 EMS units -- 
excuse me. Approximately two to three department EMS 
units, numerous fire apparatus and approximately 10 or 
12 Metro Care ambulances, all right up against the 
southwest corner of Liberty and West. 

I immediately told them to re-establish on 
the west side of West Street, not under the pedestrian 
bridge, but north of the pedestrian bridge as close to 
Liberty Street as possible. They immediately responded 
to that. 

Debris was falling. I immediately told them 
to don hard hats. Only the department EMS personnel 
had hard hats at that point. Metro Care, they didn't 
have any hard hats. I then interacted with Deputy 
Chief Robert Browne of the EMS command, who was 
directed to the same site. He directed the units over 
to the west side of West Street on -- on West Street by 
Liberty for these units to re-establish themselves in a 
more safe location. 

As the units were driving around, they did it 
in a pretty quick fashion. As they were exiting their 
vehicles, a firefighter, assigned to OEM, a Firefighter 
Tim Brown, I see him exiting the Liberty Street area of 



CHARLES WELLS 

the complex running towards us. He came up, and he 
said, he said, "Chief, I have ten people on the ground 
floor of the 2 World Trade Center, the south tower in 
the lobby. They somehow managed to get themselves into 
the elevator and got down to the lobby, and they all 
have fractured legs. We can't get them out. Could you 
come in and get them?" 

So I said, "Okay, fine." I turned around and 
I said, "Let me have six personnel and bring the 
stretchers and the back boards, and we are just going 
to put them on the back boards, and we will do fracture 
management when we get back to treatment." 

Of the six that came forward -- I asked for 
volunteers. I said whoever wants to come in with me. 
Six people immediately came up, but only two had 
helmets, and that was the crew of 18 Charlie 2, EMT 
Conzo and EMT Truoccolo. I may be pronouncing his name 
wrong. The other four were Metro Care personnel. They 
had no turnout jackets. They didn't have helmets, and 
I said, "No, you guys stay back here and just when you 
see us come out with these people, you immediately take 
them and give us your empty stretcher, and we'll do a 
round robin, swapping out the equipment to get the 
patients out . " 



CHARLES WELLS 

I told Bobby Browne what I was doing. He 
said, "Okay, fine." He was going to remain there and 
wait for us to come back out and see what we have. We 
took the crew of 18 Charlie, and they had Firefighter 
Brown direct us to where he wanted us to go. 

We entered Liberty Street from West Street, 
and we started walking down the sidewalk. We got to 
the point of being in between the Vista Hotel and the 
World Trade Center, at which point we heard a - - we 
felt a loud --a very strong vibration, shaking, and a 
loud noise like a subway train coming through a station 
at speed, like a jet engine at full throttle. It was a 
roaring sound, and he wanted to continue down Liberty 
Street, and I grabbed him. 

I said, "Tim, we can't go down there," and 
then things started to get dark, and we just ran, and 
there is some doorway around here, some doorway, and we 
ran into this doorway. We got in about, I don't know, 
a number of feet, and the wind velocity took us off our 
feet and just threw us, and then we started getting 
buried with debris. 

Q. It threw you further into the building or -- 
A. Right, into the building. Actually, it 
actually threw us. The wind was coming from the east, 



CHARLES WELLS 

from the east to the west, so we got into this doorway, 
got into something, and it just pushed us and just 
knocked you off your feet, like a wave hitting you at 
the beach, and you get stuck in the wave itself. 

So we are trapped up in there now. We are 
separated. I'm yelling to the other guys, but you're 
buried in this. 

Q. I know you are Haz-Mat trained. Did you have 
a Scott pack or no? 

A. No, and then I don't have my Scott pack any 
more. When they disbanded ERS, the ERS unit 
relinquished all their equipment back to Haz-Mat 
operations . 

Q. Okay. 

A. I had my helmet on. For some reason I had my 
strap on, and thank God that was on, as I'll tell you 
later on, and I had the EMS bunker pants, and my jacket 
on, so it took like about 10 minutes, and I was able to 
dig myself to the point where I was falling down, 
because it turns out I was suspended off the ground. 
It has debris and dig, dig, dig, and you drop, drop, 
drop, and you dig, dig, dig, and finally I was able to 
burrow out of -- like about a couple of minutes like 
moving ahead. Couldn't breathe. Choking. 



CHARLES WELLS 

There was oxygen, but you were breathing the 
dirt right in, you were eating it, so you had to keep 
moving around. Finally just pulled your jacket up over 
your face and tried to breathe inside your jacket, and 
then I hit a wall, and then I started to -- and I was 
able to stand up at that point, and the debris is now 
about waist level at that point, and then -- now the 
smoke and debris is clearing, and the whole -- you can 
see right out to West Street at this point or Liberty 
and West. You can see in that whole area, and it was, 
like, I don't know, about a hundred people. 

Everybody's heads were all popping up now. 
Everybody is digging out, so I ran into a couple of 
firefighters and I said, "Well, you know, what the hell 
happened?" Some kind of an explosion, he goes, and 
that's what I thought it was, because it was like 
coming at you sideways, so we looked out, and we're 
getting the people out, and as we are getting people 
out through this debris onto West Street, I'm looking 
at the medical treatment area, and all the fire 
apparatus, and all the ambulances were on fire, and 
nobody is around. You know, where is everybody? 

So I got back out into the street and got 
everybody out, and we directed them. They wanted to 



CHARLES WELLS 

know where to go. We said just go to the water. Just 
go to the -- get on the boat, get the hell out of the 
city. And as I crossed West Street, I'm looking north, 
and I'm looking south, and nobody is around. Nobody is 
around, and I walked over to where the ambulances were 
burning, and one by one all of a sudden people started 
to appear. You know, the Metro Care personnel, other 
EMS personnel. 

After about a few minutes, Bobby Browne's 
aid, Jay Katz, he shows up, and then Bobby shows up, so 
I said, "Let's get all the -- move the equipment out of 
the back of the ambulances that are in bags before they 
burn up and the oxygen and let's re-establish over by 
this building." 

This building turns out to be the World 
Financial Center directly across the street from 
Liberty, you know, on the corner of Liberty and West so 
we got -- there is like a knoll there, a grassy knoll, 
whatever, concrete knoll. Vehicles have flipped over, 
on fire, and we get a lot of stuff, and we put it right 
in front of this building, and now we were going to 
figure out -- we'll move down towards the water or move 
north to West Street, and we were trying to figure out 
where we should go. The radios weren't working, and we 



10 

CHARLES WELLS 



hear this noise again. 

This is 15, 20 minutes later. I don't know 
the exact time frame, and we hear this noise again, and 
I turned, and I could see Bobby Browne and Jason Katz. 
They were like about 20, 30 feet ahead of me, and they 
disappeared into the world -- they ran into the World 
Financial Center, so we start running, and we get to 
within, I don't know, five feet of it, and we get blown 
through the plate glass window with the wind velocity, 
so then we get trapped up in here, and we get buried 
again, and I'm on, I guess, like the left side of 
where -- I got pushed in and slipped to the left, and 
you got pushed into, you know -- got crashed into a 
wall, so when -- then that noise went on like a minute, 
minute and a half, and then it stopped, and we got 
buried again, but now there is somebody under me, and 
it ' s a fireman, there's a Scott pack, and we're 
wiggling around, and this turns out to be Lieutenant 
Stan Rybak of Haz-Mat operations, and we started buddy 
breathing with the Scott pack. I was able to get some 
air . 

So we started moving around, and moving 
around, and then we ran into Firefighter Jeff Borkowski 
of Haz-Mat operations, and then we ran in to 



11 

CHARLES WELLS 



firefighter Phil McArdle of Haz-Mat Company No. 1, and 
the four of us just moved around the room trying to 
find a way out, and we couldn't find our way out, but 
we knew we were in the lobby floor, at least we thought 
we were. 

After -- I don't know seemed like forever, 
but all of a sudden I could hear Phil McArdle yelling, 
"Over here, over here, " and we crawled over, and we 
end up in this -- back here somewhere around here, and 
we come outside, and it's like a morning fog, a morning 
heavy fog. There's light, but you can't see very far, 
and I couldn't breathe very well at that point. 

I was wheezing a lot, and everybody else was 
too, and our eyes --we couldn't see. Our eyes were on 
fire with this debris, so we were able to see a deli 
across the way, so we run into this deli, and the 
window had been broken out, and we go up to the 
refrigerator, and we started just powering shit, you 
know, soda, club soda, whatever we could find, just 
trying to clear our eyes, and they leave. 

For whatever reason, they left, and I'm there 
by myself, and I hear this voice behind me, "Buddy, can 
you please help me?" So I turned around. There is a 
guy on the floor, you know, covered in this dust, and 



12 
CHARLES WELLS 



he's got an angulated tib fib fracture, so I said, 
"Yeah, sure, brother, I'll help you out," and I threw 
him some water. I said, "Take some of this, start 
washing your eyes out." 

So he goes, "Are you CHARLIE WELLS?" I 
turned around, I said, "Yeah, I am." I'm looking. It 
turns out to be a friend of mine, Dave Hanchu, who's a 
Daily News photographer. I'm sure you guys have seen 
him over the years, and I go, "Dave Hanchu?" He says, 
"Yeah, Charlie." I said, I go, "Your leg's broken," 
and he goes, "I can't get up." I said, "Okay, fine, 
I'll get you out of here, but we will be moving fast. 
I don't know what the hell happened." 

Still, I don't know what's happening. So he 
starts moving with me, and he says to me -- he goes, 
"You know that one of the towers has collapsed." So I 
go, "No, no I wasn't aware of that." He says, "Because 
I took a picture of it as it was happening. That's how 
I got caught up and then got blown around." 

So I go, "All right." So then I began to 
understand the enormity of what was going on, and I 
dragged him out of the deli and got him onto the side 
to the sidewalk, and now we went west, which was a 
right turn, and we go right to this North Cove Marina, 



13 
CHARLES WELLS 



and there between where I was dragging him and the 
North Cove Marina, another fireman and a police officer 
come up to me and said, "Can we help you?" And we 
picked him up, and we carried him to this Fire 
Department marine unit, and we get him out. 

So then I walked back now toward North End 
Avenue, and now I'm trying to figure out -- no, I'm 
sorry. We -- I then leave the marina, and this 
esplanade is a walkway. I start walking down here and 
trying to, you know, re-establish where the personnel 
are. Nobody is around now, but people are walking this 
way. You know, civilians. I'm all telling them go 
down here, because word had it that there was a ferry 
over here, so I walked down here, and I ran into 
Commissioner Gregory, and a couple of seconds after 
that Jason Katz, a couple of seconds after that, half 
the crew of 18 Charlie, who was Joe Conzo -- Truoccolo 
ended up getting hurt. He got trapped up under a car, 
and he got numerous avulsions and lacerations, and they 
took him to the hospital, so now I know that they're 
alive, and then I ran into Bobby Browne, who I hadn't 
seen in about an hour, and he's alive, so -- but he 
was --we were all banged up. 

So I said, "You go down to the ferry and 



14 
CHARLES WELLS 



establish a triage point over there. If you need 
transport, we will see what we can get. I'm going to 
look around for ambulances and personnel and see what 
we can find." The radio wasn't working. The transmit 
button on the speaker mike was jammed. 

So I turned the radio off, and you can clear 
it. Turn the radio on, and I tried to transmit, and I 
reversed direction and went the other way, and over 
here I ran into about 12 -- about 6 or 8 ambulances, 
about 10 personnel, and we were able to start to -- one 
of the things I learned about this is that the face 
shield of the helmet is absolutely useless. You need 
goggles. And we can't lock the ambulances any more. 

In fact, once you got a confirmed MCI, you've 
got to leave them open, because they were running and 
locked, and the voluntary units, not only were they 
running and locked, when you broke into them, no, the 
ignition, somehow they were able to override, when you 
turn the ignition off, they can turn it. They can 
either take the key out and then lock the steering 
wheel, but the vehicle is still running, so you 
couldn't use the vehicles. 

On all the department ones, we broke the 
driver's side window, the butterfly window, and then we 



15 
CHARLES WELLS 



could get in, and then we got about eight ambulances 
running and personnel, so we get over here, and over 
here there is like a little deli -- I'm sorry, it's a 
restaurant. We got into the restaurant, and when we 
got into the restaurant, you know, behind the bar, we 
were taking the bar spigot, you know, the soda spigot, 
and we were pouring the water and the club soda in our 
eyes to clear our eyes, and the phone is ringing. 

Pick up the phone, "I can't talk right now," 
hang up, and then I picked up the phone again, and I 
tried to get through to citywide, and I couldn't get 
through to citywide, so I quick tried my house, and my 
wife picked up the phone, and I said, "You know, it's 
me. I'm all right, I'm okay, but it's going to be a 
long time before I get home, but I'm okay, love you," 
boom, I hang up the phone. 

Come back out here, get up to West Street, 
and now there is a lot of personnel. Everybody is 
starting to come -- it's starting to all come 
together. Got back all the way over here to -- excuse 
me, over here to Vesey, and there is like a big parking 
lot over here, and all the cars were on fire, and I get 
back over here, and there is more EMS personnel, so I 
said all right . 



16 
CHARLES WELLS 



We started to set up a medical triage center 
over here now, Vesey and West, and then I was able to 
get on the radio at that point, and I got through to 
citywide saying that Car 631, Deputy Chief Wells 
reporting in, and with that they said go up to Broadway 
and 85 at the command post. 

So now I had to walk -- I think I came down 
here, and I came down West through, you know, the 
gateway over here, and I came back up through here and 
took Albany Street, Thames, Trinity, and got up to 
Broadway, and I don't know what the intersection was, 
but it was 225 Broadway, a corner building, and there 
is a huge contingent of firefighters, about 15, 20 EMS 
personnel, and Dr. Kelly and Dr. Prezant, and they come 
up to me and they go, "Chief," he goes, "We are trying 
to set up" -- they wanted to set up a medical triage 
sector, treatment sector outside. 

I said, "No, no, no. Let's go into this." 
There was a corner building, which is 225 Broadway, and 
inside there is huge hallways that had side elevator 
banks, and I said, "No, let's go in here." 

The custodians of the building said, "Do you 
want us to bring desks down? You can use them as 
treatment tables." That's what they did, and then 



17 
CHARLES WELLS 



within about 15, 20 minutes, we had a well-established 
medical treatment center there with physicians from 
area hospitals, who they just showed up. 

There was a drugstore nearby that was 
accessed, broken into, and we started bringing out all 
the wound care stuff, and within about 15 minutes 
started receiving patients, most of them respiratory, a 
lot of them eye injuries, and they had pulmonologists 
there, they had ophthalmologists there, they had 
emergency physicians there, Dr. Prezant, Dr. Kelly, and 
in fairly quick fashion we were able to get this thing 
ramped up and operating. 

At that point, I was there for about an hour, 
you know, leading that, and what I could see, nobody 
wanted to be transported. They just wanted to be 
patched up to go back to work, so we had like four 
ambulances there, four department ambulances. 

Lieutenant Kevin Haugh, Captain Jeff Race, 
Lieutenant Roy David, Lieutenant Steve Lincke, I 
believe Lieutenant Jack Sullivan, and there were a few 
others, all operating this area, quickly making sure 
that the patients are getting in, getting treated and 
getting moved back out. 

After about an hour, I get a message from the 



18 
CHARLES WELLS 



command post from Chief Kowalczyk to report to the 
command post. Now they had established a command post 
back up here at West and Vesey, so Lieutenant David 
said, "I'll get you over there," because I couldn't see 
at that point now, very, very blurred vision, and I was 
having trouble breathing, and even with the eye 
treatments and them washing my eyes out, I couldn't see 
very well, and I wasn't breathing -- you know, just, 
you can hear yourself wheezing, but everybody was 
having this problem. 

So we moved -- Roy gets me all the way over 
to -- at that point a couple of blocks away from the 
command post, and Dr. Al Cherson and somebody's driving 
him, and his car is -- all the windows are blown out, 
and, you know, like, five, six inches of dust. It was 
like, wild, and the things moving, and I just jumped 
on -- Roy and I just jumped on the trunk of the car, 
and we leaned in, and I said, "Could you just get us 
over to West and Vesey." That's where I'm going, 
Chief, no problem. 

And we went over there and reported in, and 
at that point Chief McCracken was there, Chief 
Goldfarb, Chief Kowalczyk, Chief Basile, Chief 
Tramontana. There was a huge EMS contingent there with 



19 
CHARLES WELLS 



an operating medical sector, and immediately Chief 
McCracken, and Chief Kowalczyk and Chief Basile brought 
me over and, you know, said, you know, "You are going 
to the hospital." And I go, "No, I'm fine." They go, 
"Well, you are going to the hospital, but we want you 
to brief us on what you did, " you know, so I gave them 
a briefing just as I described to you, and fairly, you 
know, quick order, and I got put on the M.E.R.V., and 
at that point I got more eye treatments and got brought 
over to St. Vincent's, spent about an hour and half at 
St. Vincent's, felt a lot better, and they released me, 
and I got dressed and hitched a ride back to the 
command post, and now that's 5:30, six o'clock in the 
evening, and at that point, I never re-entered any 
building, and I was never -- I was never above street 
level in any building. 

Q. So basically after St. Vincent's you went 
back down there. Did you do any more ops? 

A. No, they wouldn't let me do any more ops. 

Q. Okay. 

A. I just, you know, basically sat there and -- 
oh, what I did do operationally, was -- they were able 
to access and have response to that medical sector, the 
EMS operations post, the use of things like three, or 



20 
CHARLES WELLS 



four or five U.S.A.R. paramedics, and I started giving 
them a briefing on what I would expect them to do over 
the next few days, start ramping up, in the event they 
activated or accessed the U.S.A.R. equipment, that I 
wanted them to be with search teams, and I gave that 
report to, you know, Chief Tramontana, Chief McCracken, 
Chief Kowalczyk, who was standing there, and after 
about an hour of that briefing, that was basically the 
conclusion of my operational role at that site, so, you 
know, for a day, got a few people out, you know, was 
able to establish a couple of medical sectors, and 
miraculously, never had a fracture, you know. 

That was it, and they said, you know, "Try 
and find your car," which I knew was on West Street, 
and they said you know, "You may not find it, you know, 
or severely damaged." 

So I walked up, and there it is. Nothing is 
wrong with it, except it's covered in about six inches 
of, you know, soot, and that was it. I got into the 
car and somehow, you know, made my way home, and then I 
was out on medical for two days, which was Wednesday, 
the 12th, Thursday, the 13th, cleared back to work by 
the ophthalmologist and my primary physician on the 
13th and then reported back to the site on the 14th. 



21 
CHARLES WELLS 



MR. DUN: This concludes the interview with 
Chief Wells. The time is 1146 hours. Thank you 
very much, sir. 

Continuation with Chief Wells, for 
clarification . 

THE WITNESS: The latter medical treatment on 
West Street with the- EMS operations command post 
where I reported back to after being released from 
St. Vincent's was located on Murray and West, on 
Murray and West, I believe, not Vesey and West. 

It would have been too close into the site, 
because I was able to visualize the collapse of 7 
World Trade Center as I was looking south on West 
Street, looking slightly east, and you could see 
the tower just disappear behind the other 
buildings, which would have been Barclay. 



File No. 9110164 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

EMT SEAN CUNNIFFE 

Interview Date: October 26, 2001 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



S. CUNNIFFE 2 

MR. DUN: Today's date is October 26th, 
2001. The time now is 8:17 a.m. I'm 
Richard Dun of the New York City Fire 
Department, City of New York. I'm working 
with Marissa Abbriano, also with the New 
York City Fire Department. I'm conducting 
an interview with the following individual. 

EMT CUNNIFFE: Sean Cunniffe, EMT 
specialist, Battalion 31. 

MR. DUN: This is in regards to the 
date of September 11th. 
Q. What do you recall? 

A. It started off like any other day. I 
went in, got our truck ready, went to stop for 
breakfast on DeKalb and Flatbush, 99 cents bacon, 
egg and cheese, can't pass that up. 

While we were ordering, we heard a lot 
of commotion on the radio. We turned up the 
radio a little bit louder to see what was going 
on. Heard what was going on, ran out to the 
truck, got in. 48 David put us on it, 48 David 
go. 

We went. While going we were a little 
bit excited, it was going to be the job of the 



S. CUNNIFFE 3 

century. 

Q. When you got the call were you able to 
see the twin towers? 

A. No, no, not from there. But en route 
as soon as we hit like Tillary Street, the 
Brooklyn Bridge is when we could see it. We 
could see the damage. It didn't look like much. 
We said -- we were thinking to ourselves, me and 
my partner, it's like, ah, some knucklehead with 
a private jet got too close or one of those 
little fighter planes. 

Q. Who was your partner that day? 

A. Jarjeam Felton, 5148. 

We were a little bit excited. We were 
like, this is gonna be the job of the century, 
the job of a career. We were going there, lights 
and sirens blasting along with I don't know how 
many other emergency vehicles over the same 
bridge as us. We went over the Brooklyn Bridge. 
We got off the Brooklyn Bridge at Park 
Row, went up Church Street, I believe -- not 
Church Street, Chambers Street. We heard there 
was two staging points: One was on Church; the 
other was West Street. My partner said to go to 



S. CUNNIFFE 4 

Church Street, and I said, "No, we always go to 
West Street." So we went to West Street. 
We got there. I don't know the 
supervisor's name, but we pulled up in front of 
Six World Trade, West and Vesey, and we parked 
our truck pretty much under the pedestrian bridge 
and waited for further instructions. 

We grabbed our equipment and got out 
and this and that. We were waiting there. 
That's when the scope of the whole incident 
unfolded before us, because as we were waiting 
there, we started seeing people falling from the 
building. 

Q. When you were driving to Chambers 
Street, did you see debris flying around? 

A. Yeah, yeah, not much but all that glass 
falling and papers and smoke. 

Q. Was there a lot of people running, 
chaos? 

A. I really didn't pay too much attention 
to it because I was too busy trying to get to the 
staging point at West Street. When we got there, 
when we got set up and we actually had a minute 
to actually stop and look and see, we were like, 



S. CUNNIFFE 5 

oh, shoot. 

Q. That was just the one tower that was 
hit at that point? 

A. Yeah. The second plane hadn't come in 
yet . 

We were lined up on West Street, west 
side, right by the pedestrian bridge, between six 
and one, over here somewhere. I don't remember 
the supervisor's name, but they had us line up, 
put our stretchers and equipment on it. We were 
just waiting for further instruction. 

As we were waiting there, counting the 
people jumping, that's when we saw the scope of 
it. We counted 39 people. It was sad. That's 
when it stopped being exciting and reality kicked 
in and we were hanging out. 

The second plane came in. It was the 
biggest noise I ever heard in my life. 
Q. Did you see the plane? 
A. Yeah. We saw it, we heard it, we felt 
the heat from it, the debris. We ducked under a 
truck, Fire Patrol 3, I believe it was, parked 
right over here. Just before -- because we 
started running. It was just before the 



S. CUNNIFFE 6 

pedestrian bridge at West and Vesey. It was 
parked over here. Debris was falling and people 
were running and panicking. 

We came out. A supervisor on the scene 
I believe said get all the vehicles around onto 
Vesey between North End and West in between here. 
So I went, got the vehicle, brought it around. 
My partner stayed there with the staging people. 

Q. The officer, was he a male? Female? 

A. Male, EMS lieutenant. 

As we were standing there, we saw Von 
Essen, Judge, run by us. We saw the Mayor come 
out. Just a lot of people were there: 31 
Victor, 31 Young and 31 Adam and 40 Charlie was 
there. A whole bunch of people from the 
neighborhood we know that work over here in 
Brooklyn. 

I went, parked the vehicle over here. 
As I was returning, I had just turned this corner 
and everybody was running into American Express. 

Q. American Express building? 

A. American Express building. That was 
our next staging point, in the lobby there. We 
set up (inaudible). Everybody was bringing 



S. CUNNIFFE 7 

stretchers, all the equipment in there, 
supervisor were in there. Everybody was waiting. 
That's when I got separated from my partner, 
because he went to try to find a phone to call 
his family. 

We were waiting there. We really 
didn't know what was going on outside because we 
were inside. We couldn't really see from this 
point that far over. That's when everybody just 
started running. The rumbling started and a big 
cloud of smoke came by the windows and started 
breaking the windows. 

Q. Now we're talking about the south tower 
collapsing? 

A. Yeah, it collapsed. I'm sure it was 
some significant time in between. It seemed like 
ten minutes, the whole job. 

Q. You lose time. 

A. Yeah. I guess it's almost an hour 
later, 9:55. 

From that, the building started 
collapsing. I just remember looking up at it and 
it was like, ah, that's not supposed to collapse. 
It's supposed to stay up. People were just 



S. CUNNIFFE 8 

running, and someone kicked me and said, "Run, 
you stupid ass, run." 

So we started running. We were running 
through the hallway, like the lobby is a big 
lobby, the hallway on the north side of the 
American Express building with the emergency 
exit, and we were packed in there like sardines 
trying to get away. 

Stupid things you remember, like I 
remember telling people just run, get the hell 
out of the building. It's coming down right on 
top of us. The windows were already breaking in 
the front. 

I remember seeing this woman. She was 
about maybe 5-5, close to 250. She was hobbling. 
I looked at her. She had a broken leg. I wound 
up grabbing her, putting her arm around me and 
just dragging her out of the building, because 
she was slowing too many people up. 

As soon as we got I'd say in between 
these two -- the Merrill Lynch, that's when I 
decided to start going back, because I heard the 
maydays on the radios and all of our friends 
screaming. I heard 31 David screaming, 31 Mary 



S. CUNNIFFE 9 

screaming, Chief Brown I believe was screaming on 
the radio. 

I just stopped and tried to go back. I 
made it right back to the corner, and that's as 
far as I got. I couldn't see anything and 
couldn't do anything. So I decided to come back 
around here. The MERV truck was here. We were 
saying we'll stay with the MERV. We'll set up 
over here. 

I don't know how long we were there, 
but we were trying to set up the MERV. We were 
getting vehicles pulled off this street. 

Q. North End Avenue? 

A. Yeah, because -- 

Q. Vesey? 

A. Vesey. That's where they had us park. 
31 Adam was dead. We were trying to boost it. 
It was like forget it, just leave it. This all 
happened approximately the same time of the 
collapse also. It was like forget it, just leave 
it. 

There was a whole bunch of us standing 
over here by the MERV truck on North End Drive, 
River Terrace, I'm not sure. It was either here 



S. CUNNIFFE 10 

or here. I'm not sure. 

Q. This is still with the first collapse? 

A. Yeah, still the first. 

Q. Did you see the fireball come yet? 

A. No, I didn't even look up. I just 
remember hearing like the helicopters. Everybody 
was just running wild, and I pretty much couldn't 
see. 

We were setting up, and we said, okay, 
let's go back. We were on our way back, and we 
made it again to pretty much the same corner of 
West End and Vesey. I guess we were standing 
right in the middle of West Street when we heard 
over the radio that tower one is leaning, 
everybody evacuate, evacuate, evacuate. 

We were just trying to get as many 
people out of there as possible just telling them 
to run. As soon as one started coming down, 
that's when we started running. I didn't stop 
until I got to the water. 

Q. River's edge? 

A. Yeah. I jumped over the wall and just 
kept going and kept going. I didn't know which 
way it was going to come. You don't know if it's 



S. CUNNIFFE 11 

coming straight down, if it's going to tilt all 
the way down. There's too many things going on 
in your head at the same time. 

I got to pretty much the water's edge 
and started running up this way. 
Q. That would be north? 

A. Yeah, started running north. The cloud 
came over. It wasn't too bad over here, the dust 
cloud. So we started -- we stayed pretty much 
between River, by the park between -- I think we 
made it as far as Murray maybe in between these 
two blocks here and the water. 

That was pretty much it. We hung out 
there. There were a lot of police officers 
around. We saw a friend of ours from -- Officer 
Torres from the 76th Precinct. He was crying on 
the steps behind Stuyvesant. We stayed with him 
because he said he just lost his partner. 
(Inaudible) and caught up in that. We consoled 
him a little bit. 

We were trying to figure out what kind 
of instructions we were going to get. They 
started saying go to Chelsea Piers up on the west 
side. We stayed there for, I don't know, maybe a 



S. CUNNIFFE 12 

half hour. 

There was a pay phone there, and the 
line for the pay phone was like 12, 15 people 
long. So I said I've got to call my wife just to 
let her know I'm okay. I waited on the line. I 
met up with Felton again -- from the lobby, which 
is when I got separated from him. But as I was 
running, I saw him pass me by. At least I was 
relieved . 

I had a lot of things going on. My 
sister works in two. I didn't know if she was 
still in there, if she got out. 

Q. Did you ever make that phone call? 
A. Yeah, yeah. I waited on that line, and 
I waited. As soon as I get up there, I asked 
somebody for a quarter, because I didn't even 
have a quarter. Trying to get a line, it took 
eight or nine times just to get a phone line and 
dial tone. Go figure, as soon as I dial the 
number and waste the quarter the line is busy, 
because she is calling here, probably. So it 
took me a while to get through, but I finally got 
through. 

I asked her, "Did you hear from my 



S. CUNNIFFE 13 

sister?" Her uncle works there also. She didn't 
know anything, and I didn't know anything. It 
was just "I'm okay and I'm going to come home." 

At the time I was on the phone, Felton 
was in front of me on the phone. He made his 
phone call already. He started walking back. I 
kept yelling at him, "Don't go back there. Stay 
with me." Because he's only here a year. 

It was kind of funny. I was nervous 
for him, because he wasn't even listening to me. 
I said, "Stay here with me. We'll go back 
together. I don't want to be separated from you 
again. I can't get a frigging line out on this 
phone." But he kept walking and walking. I was 
like, where the hell is this kid going? 

So about 15, 20 minutes later, I 
finished my phone call and I start heading back 
towards Vesey, towards North End. I guess it was 
like up here. That's when I saw him with this 
big cloud of dust turn the corner, with his head 
sticking out of the vehicle saying, "I've got the 
vehicle. I saved the vehicle." It was like" 
Yeah, yeah, yeah. It was a piece of crap. It 
dies on us twice a week. You should have let it 



S. CUNNIFFE 14 

be buried. Maybe we'll get a new one." 

We got in the vehicle. We started 
collecting -- there were a couple firefighters 
down there. We were helping them collect some 
equipment. There were a lot of firefighters that 
just dropped their packs. They were going around 
in a little golf cart. Some civilians had Scott 
packs and said, "Somebody left this." We were 
throwing them in the back. 

We were heading back towards west side, 
and I guess we made it - - I don't even know 
where, to tell you the truth. We had to make a 
U-turn in an empty lot. I guess it was like 
Vesey and North End again to this corner, and we 
saw -- do you know Abdo? 

Q. Yeah, Abdo. 

A. What is he, a lieutenant? 

Q. Yeah. He ' s a captain. He ' s a captain. 

A. Is his last name Abdo or his first 
name? 

Q. His first name. Captain Abdo Nahmod . 

A. I know him from Lutheran, but I didn't 
really know what his rank was. I saw him a 
couple times over here on Myrtle. But Abdo was 



S. CUNNIFFE 15 

there, and he was telling us to make a U-turn 
because there was a main, gas main, leaking or 
something. We just tried to circle, find a way. 
We circled back to the west side. 

We picked up some people on the West 
Side Highway, and we went up to Chelsea. That's 
it. Chelsea, we stayed there for a while, just 
doing circles when the troops came in. We got a 
little bit bored and said, screw this, we're not 
wasting our time. There's people down there that 
need help and we're sitting here. 

So we went back down and picked up an 
officer and a construction worker, went with them 
to staging, went back down, picked up more police 
officers and firefighters, brought them back up. 
We were doing transport between, say, Vesey and 
Chelsea, back and forth. We got somebody with an 
MI, a construction worker with an MI. 

Q. Did you transport him to the hospital? 

A. Yeah. There was a staging point 
somewhere on the west side. It wasn't as far 
down as Vesey. 

Q. Canal. 

A. No, it was below -- it was between the 



S. CUNNIFFE 16 

tunnel and Vesey Street. There's a staging. 

Q. Chambers. 

A. Yeah. I don't know who the supervisor 
was. There was an EMS supervisor. Any vehicle 
pretty much that passed him he stopped and he 
commandeered everybody's equipment, like throw it 
here. He had a curb full of tech bags, oxygen 
bags, de-fibs, software. So he pretty much 
stripped the bus. 

We had the patient with the MI. He 
gave me a paramedic; I forget his name too. He 
took my partner, Felton, off the vehicle. So 
Felton got off, me and the paramedic, we 
transported one to hospital 02. 

From there there was a place to restock 
your vehicles. We dropped him off and restocked 
the vehicle as much as we could. We went back 
and got held up at the staging at Chelsea Piers 
again. That was pretty much -- from one staging 
point to the other. From there they said, "Okay, 
we need two vehicles to go down to South Street 
staging." So we go down there. "We don't need 
you here." We ended up going to the Greenwich 
area staging, the command post staging. We 



S. CUNNIFFE 17 

pretty much stayed there the whole night with 
Chief Wells. 

That was it . 
Q. Thank you. 
A. Time-wise. 

MR. DUN: This concludes the interview. 
The time is 835 hours. 



File No. 9110165 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

EMT ROBERT COOK 

Interview Date: October 25, 2001 



Transcribed by Nancy Francis 



R. COOK 

MR. DUN: Today's date is October 25, 2001. 
The time is 0848 hours. I am Richard Dun with the New 
York City Fire Department working with Marisa Abbriano, 
also with the New York City Fire Department. We're 
conducting an interview with. . . 

THE WITNESS: Robert Cook. 

MR. DUN: Shield? 

THE WITNESS: Shield 3719. 

MR. DUN: Of Battalion 31. 
Q. Robert, in your own words, just please 
describe the events leading up to and after September 
11th. 

A. Up to it? Well, we were getting fuel at 
Ladder 118 when people were coming up to the firehouse, 
it's right over on Midagh Street and Henry, telling us 
that a plane hit the World Trade Center. We took 
ourselves off the pumps, drew up to the corner. A 
bunch of firemen came out of the firehouse, went to the 
corner. You could see the first tower on fire. So 
then we were available, they assigned us to the call, 
they said to switch over to Citywide. 

We proceeded over the bridge. Once we got 
over the bridge, the second plane hit. There was an 
explosion. We didn't know it was a second plane. We 



R. COOK 



thought it was just exploding from the first plane. 
Then over Citywide we heard people saying it was a 
second plane and it was deliberate. 

We proceeded down west on Chambers Street, 
made a left on West Broadway. Coming down on West 
Broadway, we were flagged on the corner by a state 
correction officer. There we observed a female laying 
on the corner and several other patients standing 
around stating that they were injured. We had a 
private ambulance also there on the scene. They 
assisted us with long boarding this female and 
splinting her leg with a tib/fib fracture. 

Q. At this point, what part were you there? 
Were you there for the first collision or the second 
collision? 

A. The second collision. 

Q. The second plane went into the building? 

A. As we were on Chambers Street. 

Q. But the buildings were still standing? 

A. Still standing, yes. They were still 
standing. The whole time we were in Manhattan, they 
were still standing and you could feel the heat coming 
all the way over to there. 

We proceeded to get about five patients into 



R. COOK 

the ambulance. We notified the supervisor that we had 
five patients. He said he'll check to see where we 
could transport the patients. He told us that he was 
ordered to have us, if they were not in extremis, to be 
transported out of the borough. So we proceeded to go 
to Long Island College with five patients. 

On the way to Long Island College, going in 
to Long Island College is when the first building 
collapsed, and then the second building came down also 
while we were still there getting the patients out. We 
were tied up a little bit at Long Island College 
because we had police cars coming in and transit cars 
coming with patients, so we had to assist them to 
unblock us, get all the patients out. 

Out of Long Island College, we got the 
stretcher back into the back of the truck and we were 
going to proceed back over the bridge. We had hit 
traffic all over the place in downtown Brooklyn trying 
to get back to the bridge. By the time we made it back 
to the Brooklyn Bridge, there was a chief there, an EMS 
chief, I don't know who she was, and I met up with 
Lieutenant Lugo and we were starting a triage post 
there. There was another unit, 32 Charlie, I believe, 
was also there. So we had about, I believe, four EMS 



R. COOK 

units and we commandeered about, I'd say, seven to 
eight private ambulances and we had a triage system 
going on there, and I was designated to be transport 
officer, which means that anybody coming in, anybody 
needs to be transported, I would tell which ambulance 
they would go in . 

We were held there for about I'd say maybe 
two hours before they released us back to 911 and they 
left the private ambulances there. So then we 
proceeded back to the station, BBP'd the ambulance and 
went back out as a 911 unit. 

Q. So both towers were still up the whole time 
that you were there? One tower went down -- 

A. When we were going to Long Island College. 
When we were at the College, the second plane came in. 

Q. The second tower? 

A. Yes. So that's basically it. We never made 
it in to the forward command post. Then we went back 
and we couldn't make it over the Brooklyn Bridge 
because of all the pedestrian traffic coming across, 
and that's when we all set up the triage there and we 
triaged patients. Then Victory Memorial had a big MERV 
set up there and also they said they had a triage 
system set up at the Marriott Hotel. 



R. COOK 

That's about it. That's all. I know it's 
nothing spectacular. 

MR. DUN: Okay. Well, this will help because 
now we know some patients and things like that. 

This concludes the interview with Robert 
Cook. The time is 0852 hours. 



File No. 9110168 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

ROSARIO TERRANOVA 

Interview Date: October 26, 2001 



Transcribed by Maureen McCormick 



MR. TAMBASCO: We are at Battalion 4 in the 
lounge, and the subject of the interview is 
Lieutenant Rosario Terranova, assigned to EMS 
Battalion 4. 

The time is now 1330 hours. 
BY MR. TAMBASCO: 

Q. If you would be good enough to just tell us 
what happened . 

A. Okay. Well, on the day of the events, I was 
actually still assigned to the Chief of Department's 
office, so my response to the incident actually was 
from headquarters, and I had been at work already. We 
were sitting -- I was sitting in my cubicle, and I 
heard Chief Ganci make a statement. You know, it was 
kind of like a screaming thing from his office. Said, 
"Come on, Danny. We gotta go right away. There's a 
plane that hit the Trade Center," and that, of course, 
was referring to Chief Nigro. 

So at first, to be honest with you, in the 
office it was kind of -- people thought maybe he was 
full of shit, you know, he was kidding around, because 
he's like --he was a jokster kind of guy, you know, 
but you could tell right away from the way he was 
moving around and people were starting to scurry that 



ROSARIO TERRANOVA 

something was happening. 

So I ran to the window. From headquarters 
you actually can see lower Manhattan, and, sure enough, 
you could see in the one tower there was this huge, you 
know, black void and smoke coming up, so we realized 
there was a serious issue, but, you know, at the time 
to be honest with you, nobody thought what was going 
on. We thought it was just some kind of fluke accident 
and a plane had hit. People started scurrying for 
stuff, but I ran right away to get Chief Gombo, because 
even though I was assigned to the chief of the 
department's office, something like this I wanted to 
get him involved right away, so I informed him of what 
was going on, and I suggested that we go together to 
the incident. 

So we gathered up our stuff, and everybody 
was rushing down the elevator banks. We got into our 
cars in the garage. Then we kind of went over in this, 
like, convoy, maybe four or five of us that followed. 
We were following Steve Mosiello, who was Chief Ganci's 
executive assistant, and Chief Ganci was in the car 
with him, Chief Nigro, Commissioner Feehan was in line 
with Commissioner Fitzpatrick, a couple of the other 
chiefs were there from upstairs. We all proceeded over 



ROSARIO TERRANOVA 

the Brooklyn Bridge. On the way over, we could see a 
lot of debris and stuff falling from the buildings. 
When we got down into lower Manhattan, we swung around 
City Hall Park, around Park Row, and then headed across 
to Church Street. From there we broke off a little 
bit. 

Most of the convoy began to head down Vesey 
Street. Chief Gombo and I swung south on Church 
Street, and we wound up parking on Fulton Street, 
heading east about a hundred feet east of Church 
Street. The reason we chose to stop there is because 
there was a significant ambulance presence there. 

We noted several voluntary hospitals there, 
and we saw some treatment going on the sidewalk. We 
decided that we would initially stop there and see what 
we could assess. We really didn't have any 
information. It was very early on in the incident. 

We came to find out afterwards, in looking at 
the unit histories, that we actually were on scene 
within six minutes of the initial call to 911. There 
was no reporting place or command post that had been 
established yet, so we opted to stop there and at least 
get some kind of idea of what we were looking at. 
After we parked the car, we initially ran into a crew 



ROSARIO TERRANOVA 

from New York Downtown Hospital. I don't know who they 
were, but they were beginning to treat patients on the 
sidewalk. 

There was a couple of patients who were 
walking wounded, a few patients that couldn't 
ambulate. I remember clearly the sea of people coming 
out of this lobby, you know, and all we could do was 
encourage them to just to keep going, keep moving away 
from the incident site. You know, people were asking 
us, "What's happening? What's going on?" We really 
just didn't have any time. Just respectfully as we 
could, told them keep moving, keep moving north, just 
get away from the incident site. 

We remember saying over the radio make sure 
everybody was their helmets on, this is a hard hat op, 
because we were starting to get hit with stuff. We 
didn't know what it was. It was mostly just soot and 
paper, but, you know, it wasn't really clear what was 
happening. About this time we heard like a little bit 
of an explosion. I guess it was secondary to the crash 
that had occurred, and we immediately told everybody 
let's retreat. We tried to take patients with us, but 
those who couldn't ambulate, we had no choice but to 
leave them there. We actually retreated across the 



ROSARIO TERRANOVA 

street back by the cemetery, which is right on the 
corner of Church and Fulton. It's part of St. Paul's 
Church there. We had some debris falling from the 
building, some larger objects and some objects with 
mass. Those patients that were unable to ambulate, 
they, unfortunately, became further victimized by the 
event. After that initially stopped, we made the 
decision to bring that treatment area back over to this 
side of the street, the east side of the street, and to 
have people as best they can use real extreme caution. 

I remember running into two people from 
headquarters there, which was Lieutenant Medjuck and 
Captain Olszewski, who are both assigned to the EMS 
command, and Chief Gombo gave them direction to assume 
the responsibilities for that area, and he was going to 
assume command of the EMS operation. At my suggestion 
to him, we began to head west of the incident down 
Vesey Street . 

We had gotten information that the fire 
command post was being established in the lobby of the 
No. 1 tower, so I expressed to him, and I thought 
because of the magnitude of the incident that's where 
he needed to be. That's where all the fire super 
people would be, the super chiefs would be, so that 



ROSARIO TERRANOVA 

would be the best position. 

Anyway, we left Captain Olszewski at that 

location. We left our vehicle where we had initially 

parked it, and we began on foot to move forward, and we 

started accepting radio transmissions as command for 

the event. 

We had established a staging area on the west 

side of West Street at Vesey Street being the cross. 

We instructed additional ambulances responding in that 

they should take that location as their staging 

location. We also ran into Captain Stone from 

Battalion 8 at that location, and Captain Stone was 

going to begin to coordinate those efforts. He wasn't 

necessarily assigned the role of staging, but it was 

his job to assume that an officer was placed in charge 

of that, and that began to come to fruition. 

Chief Gombo and I began to proceed into the 

lobby of No. 1 tower, which is where fire had 

established a command position by the side command 

center. It was clear on the west side of the building 

that the damage, physical damage, to the building 

wasn't as extensive as it was on the east, but still we 

had a lot of debris, visible flames. We -- our path 

was, you know, was obstructed by some bodies that were 



ROSARIO TERRANOVA 

on the scene. I remember saying to Chief Gombo how 
horrific a scene this really was. You know, there was 
a couple of spots where we recognized by clothing that 
there were body parts, but we couldn't even recognize 
male or female. You know, it was just horrific. 

So anyway, we decided to proceed into the 
lobby, which is where they had established the command 
post, and it was a very hazardous location to begin 
with. I mean, there was a lot of glass on the floor. 
A lot of the window panes from the lobby had been 
already broken. I can't tell you if they were broken 
intentionally by fire personnel for venting or if they 
were broken as a result of the incident, but we began 
to establish command there. 

We saw many people there. We saw Father 
Judge there. We saw Commissioner Feehan there. We saw 
Chief Turi there. We saw -- who else? I'm trying to 
think who else was there. Anyway, if I come back to 
the names, I'll try to remember, but there was a 
significant number of people there. It was clear that 
that's where the initial command post was being 
established. We began to -- we began to speak and 
discuss about the long term, how we're going to attack 
this operation. I could see the mezzanine level -- I 



ROSARIO TERRANOVA 

don't know if you are familiar with where that lobby 
was, but there was a mezzanine level above you, and 
then there was like a vestibule in there that you could 
go up a set of escalators to the plaza or into 6 World 
Trade Center. We could see at the mezzanine level 
there was a significant number of people being 
evacuated out into the plaza area from the mezzanine. 
I commented to Chief Gombo I thought it was so amazing 
how people were really moving, you know, very 
organized, very coordinated effort. 

We remained at that location for a little 
while. Chief Basile came in, and he was there. They 
began to discuss strategies and what was going to 
occur. A couple of times really we were frightened by 
what we thought were additional explosions. We kept 
hearing these large boom, boom, and actually what it 
turned out to be -- what it said in the Times, it 
actually was people jumping and hitting on the glass 
awning that was outside the lobby there. We then 
decided that -- Chief Ganci had left, and he was 
actually establishing a fire command post across the 
street on West Street, south of Vesey Street. I would 
say the best landmark would be in front of the Winter 
Garden or, actually if you look at the Winter Garden 



10 

ROSARIO TERRANOVA 



dome, it would just be almost just north of that spot. 
There was -- the best way to explain it is there was a 
driveway to a loading dock to that building, and it was 
established there at that location. 

Q. Which I guess probably was the American 
Express Building. 

A. That's what it is, right. There was a 
loading dock off of West Street for 3 World Financial 
Center, which is the American Express Building, and 
that is just north of the Winter Garden, and that's 
exactly where it was. This pedestrian bridge that 
existed on the map, if you look at it as reference, 
just north of that is where this driveway was. We 
could --so that's where we decided to proceed, we 
would move to that location, and we did so. 

We did so, I would say, probably about ten 
minutes after Chief Ganci had left to go there, and 
still at this point the second building, the second 
building had yet to be affected, and there was some 
question about this. There was a video that I was 
privy to see, which is being kept confidential in 
nature, held by the chief of safety, and it was taken 
by an amateur photographer who was doing some training 
with the first battalion. I don't know if you are 



11 

ROSARIO TERRANOVA 



aware of the tape, but anyway it's really helped me -- 
seeing that helped me get this frame of reference. I'm 
very sure of my times on this, you know. 

So anyway, Chief Gombo and I decided to 
proceed out of the building. We left Chief Basile at 
the building to coordinate resources there. Now, we 
moved out of the building back across West Street. We 
kept on staging again to see what was occurring. We 
had a few people that were standing south of Vesey 
Street. We corrected that situation, moved everybody 
north again on Vesey Street where we wanted to stage, 
and, you know, our mentality about staging is always -- 
especially now, since we're working with the Fire 
Department, to get further away, because we know that 
they're coming with additional resources, and we don't 
want to lose any assets behind them. 

So again we moved them, and then we proceeded 
to the command post. Now, at the command post, I 
remember seeing Chief Ganci there, Steve Mosiello, 
Chief Burns. I remember speaking with Commissioner 
Feehan . Commissioner Fitzpatrick was there, and it's 
funny, because Commission Feehan asked me, you know, 
what about the patient count, how many patients we 
got? I said to him, "Listen, Commissioner, with all 



12 
ROSARIO TERRANOVA 



due respect, it's a lot." You know, and we kind of 
giggled. He said, "I know, I know, but I have to ask 
the question." It's kind of sad to me because it was 
almost in a jovial way. I mean, that was his 
personality. Anyway, we began to establish our 
situation now, and we heard a little -- all of a sudden 
we hear a huge explosion, you know, and in looking up, 
you could see the second tower being hit by this second 
plane, you know, and it was at that --it was at that 
very moment that everybody there realized that we 
were -- you know, that this was clearly a planned act 
that this is -- 

Q. No accident? 

A. This was no accident, you know, and it was a 
terrible feeling to say, oh, my God, you know, this is 
something that's really bad that's happening. You 
know, just on a personal note you started to think, I 
wish I could call somebody or do something, but there 
was no time for that kind of stuff. We had to put that 
away. 

So we initially began discussing the need for 
resources, retreat of resources, where we could move 
people to, if we had to. What are going to be some of 
our evacuation plans? We started to discuss what 



13 
ROSARIO TERRANOVA 



further acts we could anticipate. Is there something 
else that's going on in other places of the city? 
Should we anticipate additional problems down here in 
the financial center? 

It seems like it happened very fast. I mean, 
the time went actually longer than that, when you're 
involved in it, I'm sure you understand that, you know, 
it seems like these things are happening, and there's 
no real time frame. 

While we were discussing this, I remember 
hearing Chief Ganci say, "Oh, shit," you know, so we 
all looked up, and you could hear this rumble coming. 
We looked up at the south tower, which is the No. 2 
tower, and all of a sudden we began to see like a 
pancake. I mean, it's as simple as that. If you could 
imagine you had two cards in your hand, and you just 
clapped your hands, and they just closed on each 
other. That's what it looked like, like a toy, and we 
began to see the pancake, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, 
boom, boom, boom, one floor after another, as quick as 
you can imagine it . 

At the time I was standing looking at the 
building in front of the fire command board. To my 
left was Chief Gombo and to my right was -- to my right 



14 
ROSARIO TERRANOVA 



front was Chief Ganci with his aide, Steve, and right 
directly to my left was Roger Moore, Lieutenant Roger 
Moore. Directly behind him to my right was 
Commissioner Feehan, so I remember Chief Ganci saying, 
"Go, go, go, go." 

Everybody decided which way they were going 
to go. Some people went to the left. Some people went 
to the right. I decided -- I looked behind me, and I 
saw a few people were heading into this loading dock. 
The loading dock bay was actually open. I thought to 
myself, I don't think I could -- I don't think I can 
out run this, you know, and maybe I got a better chance 
getting into safety, so I said to Gombo, "Come on let's 
go." 

I went about three steps, maybe three or four 
steps running, and I turned to see and he 
wasn't -- Gombo wasn't there. He was still kind of 
standing, looking at the building, so I ran back to 
him. I kind of grabbed him by the neck like a -- you 
know, the best way I can describe it is like a kitty 
cat. I grabbed him by the scruff of the neck, and I 
pulled him with me into this building. 

When we got inside the bay, we could hear it 
getting louder. You know, it's getting loud, and it 



15 
ROSARIO TERRANOVA 



was getting dark, so I had to him -- you know, I said 
to myself, maybe we should -- you know, it's an odd 
thing, because even though you certainly were running 
for your safety, there is an odd curiosity, and you 
want to see it. You want to see what's happening, so 
everybody was run to go what they thought was safe, but 
still not getting as far away from the door as they 
probably should have. I said to myself, you know what, 
this is not how I want to check out, so I said let's 
go , and I grabbed Gombo. I was going to run down 
further into the bay, and then -- I don't know. It's 
very strange, but in the loading dock, right against 
the wall very close to the door was a white van, and it 
was just parked there, and I said, "All right. We are 
going to grab refuge behind this van." 

We went to the back of the van, and we got 
down on the ground, and we heard this huge, thunderous, 
loud sound, and then it was completely dark and 
completely silent. It was like the sound of death. It 
was so strange, because there was all this commotion, 
and people screaming, run, run, run, go, go, go, and 
then I guess at the point --at that point the debris 
hit the bay, and it was just complete silence, an eerie 
silence. I'd be amazed that people who were in that 



16 
ROSARIO TERRANOVA 



garage don't describe it the same exact way, that eerie 
silence. I took a second and realized -- I mean it was 
dark. We had a few lights down at the end of the 
garage, the end of the loading bay, but it was very 
dark. 

I took a second to realize, okay, I'm not 
trapped. I can move everything. I had Gombo. I 
wouldn't let him go. I could feel his shirt. Then I 
went to take a breath, and all I got was dirt. It was 
at that point I said to myself, did you make a bad 
decision not running? Because now, you know, maybe you 
didn't get buried in this crap, but are you going to be 
able to breathe? Are you going to suffocate here? 

But anyway, the long and the short of it is 
we took a second, and within a minute or so the dust 
started to settle a little bit. You could breathe 
through your clothes. People began to scream. I 
remember Jerry saying, "Ross," and I said, "Jerry." We 
had each other. He had a little flashlight. He had 
the flash on, and we were trying to see did we see 
anybody else. Then I thought to myself -- I thought of 
the thing about the '93 incident when they had this 
Ryder truck full of explosive, and now I realized how 
strange it was that this white van was parked in this 



17 
ROSARIO TERRANOVA 



loading dock. I started to think to myself, God, did 
we step into the wrong place here? So I said to Gombo, 
"Look, we gotta get out of here, because we don't 
know --" I didn't know the integrity of the building we 
were in, what fell on us, how much we're under, so we 
tried to go back and look, but it was too dusty. I 
couldn't see anything. 

There was a couple of firefighters in the 
building, so we proceeded to the back. Everybody 
proceeded first to the back of the garage. We saw 
Terry Wynter there, who was from OEM. He was in the 
garage with us. I saw a couple of cops and, you know, 
Jerry started asking me "Where's Feehan? Where is 
Ganci?" We didn't see them, so we believed, him and I 
believed, that they were buried as a result of that. 
Then he said, "Where's Roger?" He thought Roger was 
behind us, and we couldn't find Roger either. So we 
just assumed that these guys had been buried. 

Now, it was strange, because -- I'll get 
right back to where I am, but we didn't realize -- we 
didn't find out until Friday of that week that that's 
not where Ganci and Feehan perished. That was mostly 
because we spent so much time working at the scene the 
next three days, we didn't have any time to talk to 



18 
ROSARIO TERRANOVA 



anybody else and find out what really occurred. 
Anyway, they were able to evacuate by running. Then we 
also found out that --we also found out from Roger 
that, in fact, he had injured his leg, actually both 
his legs, but he actually was in that garage. He 
actually made it in that garage. We felt -- or I can 
speak for myself -- Chief Gombo may say otherwise -- 
but I felt profoundly upset because, you know, it was 
afterwards that I found this out. 

I thought, man, I abandoned him, you know. I 
should have gone back to him and looked for him, but, 
like we said, we didn't have SCBAs . It was very -- 
breathing was very poor in there, and we asked some 
firefighters to go back and see if anybody had survived 
that had been buried or trapped. It turned out that 
those firefighters are the guys who helped carry him 
out of that garage. 
Q. Right. 

A. Yes, so Roger, that's correct, so in a sense, 
I guess -- while I may feel personally bad for not 
doing it myself, I guess in a sense we sent somebody to 
help him, so there is some resolve there. 

I'm sorry. I know I'm a little long winded, 
but I hope it will help you. 



19 
ROSARIO TERRANOVA 



Q. Not at all. 

A. We -- so we were in this little garage 
office, which I guess was intended for the attendant. 
There was a telephone there we were trying to get out 
on. We couldn't get an outside line. As a matter of 
fact, somebody called in looking for somebody, and 
Chief Gombo said to them, "Look, you know, he's not 
here, but if you can call somebody, tell them that 
there are people in this place, and we don't know if we 
have a way out . " 

Anyway, one of the firefighters that was in 
there decided that they would take the stairway to see 
if there was an access point above us. While he did 
that, we waited. We sealed the doors and put some 
towels down to try to lessen the smoke situation and 
the dust situation in the room we were in. 

I would say maybe about five, ten minutes 
went by, and the firefighter came back to us and said, 
"Look, I found an access." We have to take a stairway 
about maybe two floors up, and then we needed to walk 
towards the back of the building, and then there was a 
door that emptied into the courtyard of the back of the 
building, 3 Financial on the west side of the building 
or directly against -- directly north of Battery Park 



20 
ROSARIO TERRANOVA 



by the water line. 

Q. Right. 

A. We were able to evacuate the building in that 
fashion. We got out of the building. There was debris 
and dust everywhere. If you need an explanation, the 
best way to try to describe it is take a vacuum bag 
that you should have changed two weeks ago. 

Q. Right. 

A. Then open it and just throw it up in the 
air. That's what it looked like, the dust and shit 
flying everywhere. So we said okay -- now that we're 
out, let's try to get on the radio and make some 
communication. We were able to get on the radio, let 
them know that we were all right, and try to get a 
status for the operation. 

It was difficult to -- it was a difficult 
situation to try to get back in charge of, because we 
were out of commission for probably about 30 minutes. 

Q. Right. 

A. In our absence, things had already been going 
in place, so it seemed senseless to take that role back 
over. What we opted to do is we opted to try to move 
back towards the incident site and see who we could get 
ahold of. 



21 
ROSARIO TERRANOVA 



Q. Right. 

A. So we began to -- let me find my bearings 
here. We began to move -- yes, we began here on North 
End Avenue. 

Q. Right. 

A. We began to head up North End Avenue and then 
to Vesey. 

Q. And then east across Vesey? 

A. Then we tried to go east across Vesey. Now, 
what wound up happening was we encountered a lot of 
ambulance crews that were operating between 3 and 4 
Financial Center, on Vesey Street, which is between 
West and North End Avenue. 

On North End Avenue, north of Vesey Street, 
there's a hotel there. What we started to do is we 
established a treatment area in the lobby of this 
hotel. I'm sorry. The name escapes me, but we began 
to establish a treatment area in the lobby of this 
hotel off of North End Avenue. Like I said, there were 
crews operating here on Vesey Street, and there was 
some crews operating south of Vesey on North End 
Avenue, as well. 

We actually met up with Chief Basile there. 
We met up with Chief Pascal there. Chief Gombo 



22 
ROSARIO TERRANOVA 



actually called a meeting with the chief officers there 
because we were unable to make any contact with Chief 
McCracken. We were --we knew he was there, but we 
were unable to contact him. We weren't sure if he had 
perished in the incident. There was, of course, rumors 
flying all over the place, this one is dead, that one 
is dead, so we did our best to figure things out. 

Chief Goldfarb was there with us. Chief 
Villani was there. What we decided to do is we decided 
that we would continue to maintain this treatment 
area. I suggested to Chief Gombo that there's going to 
have to be a spot where the agencies are going to start 
to get together, and the only logical place we could 
think of, given the proximity at the time of OEM to the 
incident, we didn't think that they would be at their 
offices in 7 World Trade Center. We decided that we 
needed to make our way to One Police Plaza, which is 
all the way on the east side of Manhattan. We thought 
that -- Chief Gombo and I said we're going to proceed 
over to that location. That was our initial plan, and 
right around this time again we had some commotion. We 
stopped our meeting, and we went out again where we 
were treating patients, and we were out on the street 
when we heard the rumble of the second tower 



23 
ROSARIO TERRANOVA 



collapsing. I remember specifically myself going up 
Vesey Street again towards -- 

Q. Eastbound? 

A. Yes, heading eastbound up Vesey Street to try 
to wave people down. Come on, come on, let's go, let's 
go. There was one guy, he didn't want to leave his 
patient. I said, "Come on, you have to leave her. You 
gotta evacuate that location." 

I remember seeing the rubble, seeing the 
rubble fall and actually start to chase down the 
street, and, you know, it's strange because you 
wouldn't expect -- you wouldn't expect debris to do 
that, but it literally traveled, like, you would see 
these movies with like a tidal wave that flows through 
the streets and hits down any path it can. It 
literally traveled that way. I began to retreat 
myself, begging people to come with me back onto North 
End Avenue. Then I took a position against the 
building on North End Avenue just north of Vesey 
Street. 

Q. With the building between you and the -- 

A. Right, like, I put myself up against the 
building. I was -- I stayed as close to the edge as I 
possibly could, because I wanted to try to be able to 



24 
ROSARIO TERRANOVA 



grab people or just pull them off to the side, because 
I was afraid people would keep running straight and put 
themselves still in the middle of the road. 

There was some people on the south of Vesey 
Street that refused to come over. They were fine where 
they were. Then, just like I described, there is this 
huge puff of dust to my left through Vesey Street, and 
then to my right through Murray Street. The percussion 
of it was so much it actually pulled me off the 
building, you know, so I can't -- there were a couple 
of people who I remember seeing on Vesey Street who I 
couldn't find again. 

Q. Right. 

A. Oh, I want to mention this. I forgot to 
mention this. Going back to the command post. 

Q. Right, the original command post? 

A. Original command post in front --on West 
Street. One of the people who I had lost sight of was 
Sam Harris. He's an EMT. He's Chief Digg's aide. He 
happened to have been there with Captain Pincus that 
day. He was working with us to start some 
communication, and he broke off from us to head up into 
the Winter Garden building to try to make some 
communications. It was at that point when that 



25 
ROSARIO TERRANOVA 



building collapsed. 

Now, I bring it up only because I met up 
again with Sam Harris and accounted for him back at the 
hotel at North End Avenue. 
Q. Right. 
A. So we -- he at least was accounted for. 

One of the people we couldn't account for at 
that time was Chief Basile's aide. His name escapes 
me, but I know we were looking for him. We couldn't 
account for him. He was later accounted for, thank 
goodness . 

Anyway, after the second building collapsed, 
here we were again consumed with this debris shield, 
this dust shield, you know. There was some people who 
had taken refuge underneath ambulances. But anyway, we 
started to recoup things a little bit, and I said, 
okay, now we really have to think about what we're 
doing. So we were back in the lobby, and actually 
stepped away from the windows. Everybody started to 
get very paranoid of what was going to happen next. We 
were establishing our plans for the operation, who was 
going to be responsible for what sectors, and all of a 
sudden I noted -- I saw a lot of cops running north 
past the building. Even some firefighters, and I was 



26 
ROSARIO TERRANOVA 



too curious, saying, "What are these guys running 
from?" So I went outside I said, "What's the story?" 
They told us that as a result of the collapse, the 
building that we were in had had a gas leak breach on 
the opposite side of the building. So I went back in, 
and I said to Chief Gombo, "Look, I think we need to -- 
have to just abandon our operation here and move 
everybody north as far north as we can and get a handle 
on this, " because we need to make sure all our people 
are safe. Of course he was very frustrated at the 
time, too, and he said to me, "How far north do you 
think we should go?" I remember specifically telling 
him I think we should walk north until you don't see 
any stuff any more. Just keep going north. 

So anyway we decided --we started proceeding 
north on North End Avenue with a convoy of personnel. 
It was about Murray Street that we actually encountered 
Chief Callan, fire Chief Callan . He was — I don't 
mean any disrespect to him, but he was completely dazed 
and out of it. He was just in total shock from the 
event, just walking in circles, you know. I grabbed 
him, I said, "Chief Callan, are you all right? Are you 
okay." He just said to me, "Hi, how you doing?" I 
said "Chief, come on. Why don't you walk with us. We 



27 
ROSARIO TERRANOVA 



have to start walking forward. Why don't you get all 
your people to come with us. We have to move north." 

That kind of snapped him a little bit out of 
it, and he started to give the order to his people, 
let's move north, let's move north, so we did. We 
moved, I would say, a couple of blocks. I can't tell 
you exactly where we stopped. Probably somewhere 
around Warren Street. We began to -- there was a 
police officer from the Police Department chief of 
department's office, who actually had a gator out. 
They must have had them at headquarters and used them 
to transport people over. We explained to them what we 
were doing, and he said, "Come on, chief, I'll take you 
over," so we went, Chief Gombo and I, Chief Goldfarb 
and his aide. We went to One Police Plaza. 

When we got there, we went upstairs to the 
command center. The command center had already been 
completely activated. I mean, there was a flurry of 
activity going on, and it was there for the first time 
that we began to see some images on the television of 
what had occurred. I remember saying to Chief Gombo 
what a good decision it was to come there, because it 
was --we now had the landline capability. We were 
able to call headquarters. We were able to establish 



28 
ROSARIO TERRANOVA 



some interagency communications. We still didn't have 
a fire rep with us, but anyway we decided this would be 
a good spot. We made contact with headquarters. We 
made contact with fire operations to say that this is 
where we are, and we think it would be an excellent 
idea to have a fire rep there. 

The choice to bring Chief Goldfarb with us 
was a superb choice, because he had a vast knowledge of 
mutual aid and interagency communications. He was able 
to start establishing contact with FEMA and with state 
EMS and begin to put plans in place immediately for 
mutual aid. 

He also had a very intricate knowledge of the 
Oklahoma City bombing. So he was very influential on 
telling us this is what we should anticipate in 24 
hours. This is what we can anticipate in 48 hours. I 
tell you, I got to give him a lot of credit. He was a 
hundred percent on the money, because, sure enough, he 
was right. I mean, the amount of supplies that came 
in. Just for example, as an insight, one of the first 
things he said to us that we had to consider doing is 
find warehouse space. 

At least, we both looked at him, like, how 
could you think about that now, and he said, "Trust 



29 
ROSARIO TERRANOVA 



me. You are going to want to think about that because 
in two days you are not going to be able to move." He 
was a hundred percent correct. I mean, this battalion 
here, Battalion 4, simply by nature of its proximity 
and the logistics of the station became an absolute 
warehouse. It wasn't till last week that we just got 
rid of almost 200 cases of food and clothing that we 
sent to shelters because we had no need for it. We 
were completely overwhelmed by generosity. 

So anyway, we spent a large portion of the 
rest of the day, I would say realistically we were 
there. We got there around one o'clock, and we spent 
the day there until about ten o'clock. About ten 
o'clock we decided that we would --we wanted to head 
back over and see what was happening. Captain 
Connelly, who was on duty, he just came on duty. He 
was sent to the trade center, to the command post at 
One Police Plaza to take over for EMS liaison. We 
decided we would rotate. We built a schedule for 
continuous manpower there for staffing. Chief Gombo 
and I, along with Chief Goldfarb and his aide, decided 
to head over. We decided we'd walk over on foot, and 
we were able to do that. 

First thing we did was we wanted to go and 



30 
ROSARIO TERRANOVA 



see what kind of condition, if at all, Chief Gombo's 
car was in. Because that was our mode of 
transportation. As it turned out, amazingly, because 
of the way the building fell, his car was not hit by 
debris, although the driver's window had been broken. 
Of course, the car was filthy and dusty inside, but 
other than the driver's window, we started the car, and 
it was fine. Interestingly enough, there were a lot of 
other cars with the windows broken like that. We 
thought it odd that just one window would have been 
broken, and we surmised later on from speaking to 
people that actually it was not broken as a result of 
the incidents. It was broken by people after the 
buildings fell to try to get in and get some fresh air, 
which I suppose it ' s a small price to pay for a 
window. 

Anyway, once we realized the car was all 
right, we left it there. We were able to get it out. 
We had to come over some hose lines and stuff, but 
there was a path to get through. It was filthy in the 
streets. There was inches and inches of dust and 
muck. By the time we had gotten there, of course both 
the buildings had fallen. This one building -- I'm 
trying to describe exactly which one it was. I guess 



31 
ROSARIO TERRANOVA 



it was 5 World Trade Center had kind of been gutted out 
just like a picture out of a movie. You wouldn't even 
believe it . 

So we started to proceed north on Church 
because, of course, you know, the command center -- by 
the time we were done with this, the EMS command post 
had been established at Chambers Street and West 
Street. That's actually across from Stuyvesant High 
School. Ironically, that's where we remained for 
several weeks after the incident, as far as the command 
post was concerned. We began to walk up Church Street 
in an attempt to make our way over to West Street. We 
were going to go down Vesey Street, but it was 
completely blocked by debris. 

Then we decided we'd stay north of Chambers 
Street. We ran into a couple of different people we 
knew. I ran into this guy, we call him Yack. His name 
is Jimmy Yakamovich. He's a fire captain. He was a 
good friend of Chief Ganci's. Everybody knows Yack. 
Most people know him by now. 

Anyway, we ran into him, and he was there. 
He was there in some somebody else's bunker gear and 
helmet, and he was telling me -- we were talking 
about --he goes, you know -- you know, Ganci is dead 



32 
ROSARIO TERRANOVA 



and Feehan is dead. They can't find Burns or Barbara, 
or -- you know, the list just went on and on, Fanning. 
It was hard to believe. I mean, Fanning, and Downey. 
I mean, these guys who had all but made the department 
in the last 40 years, all of them gone in one shot. I 
mean, people began to think about how we going to move 
on from here, you know. We were glad to hear at the 
time we knew Nigro was okay, Cassano was okay. I knew 
Callan was okay, because I saw him myself, although 
physically okay at least. So we -- you know, we wished 
him well. We made our way over to Chambers and West 
Street. That's where we ran into -- Chief McCracken 
actually was there. He looked beat up, but he was in 
good shape. He was in complete command, as always, of 
what was going on with EMS. He had established a very 
good plan about how we were going to do things. He 
began to say to Chief Gombo, at least for the next few 
days we need to -- him and I need to -- him and I 
meaning Chief Gombo and Chief McCracken need to be on 
this rotating schedule. One of them always needs to be 
there. So we decided that we would -- Chief Gombo and 
I would head home. 

It took us about midnight by this decision. 
We would head home and then come back in the morning to 



33 
ROSARIO TERRANOVA 



relieve him. Chief McCracken would stay own, and then 
we would go on, like, this twelve-hour thing for the 
next few days. So we did. We made our way back to the 
car, and we headed home. That particular night I 
stayed by Chief Gombo. We went home for a couple of 
hours, and we headed back in on the 12th. 

So that's my recollection of September 11. I 
mean, I have some other stuff that we did subsequent to 
that, but, I mean, it doesn't -- 

Q. No, that's pretty much -- other than anything 
else you may just want to add. I mean, you know, 
feeling wise or anything like that, that you'd like to 
have added into this, that's -- I can't ask for much 
more detail than you have given me. 

A. Well, I tried my best to lay it out, because, 
I mean, it's helpful for me to talk about it. I mean, 
it was difficult --it was a difficult week, you 
know, . I mean, a lot of stuff went on to establish 
things there. You know, in the subsequent days, we 
worked with Jersey City Medical Center, who had lent us 
a command post to use. 

Q. Right. 

A. Something that should be on the record, 
should be that EMS needs to have a command post so we 



34 
ROSARIO TERRANOVA 



can operate the long-term operation. I mean, we used 
to have the field com, however inappropriate that 
vehicle might have been, but we still had it. The 
truth be known, fire communications has vehicles, but 
they are fine for fire communications. When we need to 
set up something like this, we need to go outside and 
say could you help us, because we don't have -- and 
that's a kind of silly situation. But that's a 
personal feeling, not a professional one. We took the 
time to go to the ME's office and see their operation 
there. I have to tell you, it's horrific. 

They were doing -- I mean literally doing 
autopsies right on the street underneath tents. I give 
a lot of credit to the guys who worked sectors in the 
next coming days. One of the hardest sectors to 
establish was the morgue sector. It was hard because 
there were a lot of -- tensions were running high, 
let's just put it that way. 

I mean, we had some run-ins -- when I say we, 
I mean Chief Gombo and I. We basically were married at 
the hip for the remainder of the week, you know. We 
had some run-ins with Chief Butler and Chief Cruthers, 
which were later ironed out. Of course, they were just 
nothing more than people being so profoundly saddened 



35 
ROSARIO TERRANOVA 



by what had occurred. It was important to us, and, of 
course, it was important to fire suppression, as well. 
We needed to establish a very clear, well-maintained 
morgue sector. So that one, of course, we could 
account for all our lost, both PD, fire and EMS, but 
mostly so that we could ensure that the remains of the 
Fire Department personnel would be returned as quickly 
as possible to their families. That was something that 
was difficult to do, but I'm proud the way that worked 
out . 

And, you know, we went on. I mean, things 
have somewhat come down to normal at this point, or at 
least started to establish a long-term basis, you 
know. We -- right after the event, we established 
24-hour coverage of headquarters and a staffing person 
at OEM a staffing person at police headquarters, and, 
you know, staffing people at the command center. For 
the first week or so everybody -- you couldn't pull 
people away if you tried. Everybody wanted to be 
there. They couldn't do enough, but it had to come to 
a point where you had a decision to make that this is 
going to be a long-term operation. This stuff is not 
going to go away tomorrow. The debris is just not 
going to clear. We are going to have to be into this 



36 
ROSARIO TERRANOVA 



for six months or a year and still you need to 
establish a long-term plan because you can't run out of 
people in six weeks, and that's where we were headed. 

So to our credit -- I mean, I think that 
things are proceeding okay now. I mean, I think it's 
good that people are volunteering to do overtime down 
there, and that the 911 system is back in place the way 
it was, although, in my opinion, of course, I don't 
know how much -- how long you could ask people to do 
overtime in that kind of scenario. I think it ' s a very 
difficult thing to do. 

I mean, I have my ideas about how we could do 
it also, but we will leave it at that. I'm glad to -- 
in a sense, I'm glad to have survived it and be able to 
contribute to this collection of information. I think 
it's important to document historically what's happened 
in the department. 

You know, from my perspective, I've 
encouraged everybody I know to speak to you about this, 
to speak to investigators about this. You know, 
there's an unfortunate stigmatism that comes with your 
office and your organization and, you know, what are 
they looking for? Are they looking to fire people 
because they put in for comp. packages and they 



37 
ROSARIO TERRANOVA 



weren't there. 

I mean, of course, you know, to be honest 
with you, if people are performing inappropriately, 
they need to be discussed with it, but I -- so they 
don't expect that that's the meat and potatoes of this 
investigation. I don't -- I didn't approach it that 
way. I hope my information has been informative to 
you . 

Q. It certainly has been, and just keep in mind 
that -- actually think about it 30 or 50 years from now 
when somebody wants to look back and this and get more 
of the personal stories. 

A. You know, I tell you why I think it's a good 
idea, I'm offering these things up, because maybe it 
will come up for further discussion. 

One of the things we used to at EMS prior to 
the merger, we used to do post incident summary 
reports. This was something that Chief Cross was a 
stickler for when he was the chief of operations for 
EMS. Any time we had a big incident -- I mean a big -- 
certainly not relative to this, a big, you know, a 
plane crash, a building clamps, along those lines, we 
always take the time to do a post incident critique. 
What we would do is we would print the CAD and gather 



38 
ROSARIO TERRANOVA 



all the ACRs and create a time line and a table of 
organization and speak to those in charge and have 
narratives written, and this information would be put 
in chronological order and stored on paper so that we 
can learn from the lessons we had. I think back on the 
World Trade Center event, which is an event that we did 
not do a post-incident summary about, largely because 
of the magnitude. 

Q. Right. 

A. But I think back on that event, working in 
operations as I did, and working with the chief of 
department's office as the correspondence liaison, I 
received on many occasions inquiries from people who 
wanted to learn from our department. It was a standard 
joke when anybody would call about the '93 bombing they 
would be switched immediately to Chief Seretta, because 
Chief Seretta was one of the command officers. Then 
when Chief Seretta retired, they switched this person 
immediately to Chief Burns because Chief Burns was also 
one of the ranking fire chiefs -- but unfortunately 
there are no more rank and file chiefs that were in 
'93. All their information, and history and expertise 
has been lost. That's a real shame, so I hope that -- 
I hope that this will pave the way for other future 



39 
ROSARIO TERRANOVA 



considerations for reports like that when we have these 
types of -- it's important history, and you're doing an 
important thing here. 

That's all I have. 

Q. That's about it, Ross. I thank for you the 
info. It certainly was quite detailed. 

A. I hope it's been helpful to you. Thanks a 
lot, Michael. 

MR. TAMBASCO: We conclude as 1415 hours on 

October 26. 



File No. 9110170 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

EMT CURTIS JACKSON 

Interview Date: October 30, 2001 



Transcribed by Nancy Francis 



C. JACKSON 

MR. CASTORINA: Today is October 30th, 2001. 
I'm Ron Castorina from the New York City Fire 
Department conducting an interview at Battalion 31 with 
EMT Curtis Jackson. With me is... 

MR. DUN: Richard Dun, Fire Department. 

Q. Sir, can you tell me your name, your rank, 
your title and your assignment? 

A. Curtis Jackson, EMT. 

Q. EMT at battalion-- 

A. Battalion 31. 

Q. Can you tell me, on September 11th, 2001, on 
that particular day, the events that took place? 

A. Sure. We came out of Brooklyn Hospital, me 
and my partner that I was working with that day, and as 
we went 98 -- 

Q. Who was your partner? 

A. Decosta Wright . 

Q. Okay. 

A. We hit the 98 button and got in our vehicle, 
tried to head to our 89, and we heard the dispatcher 
sending numerous units over to Citywide. So we wanted 
to find out what was going on, so we switched one of 
our radios over to Citywide and we found out the World 
Trade Center was on fire. So we started to head over 



C. JACKSON 

into that direction towards the bridge and we asked the 
dispatcher to give us that assignment. 

MR. CASTORINA: Excuse me. This interview is 
conducted at 0615 hours. 

Q. Go ahead. 

A. As we requested to be placed on that 
assignment, the dispatcher gave us the assignment, we 
went 63 to the World Trade Center. We shot right over 
the bridge in about five or seven minutes and we pulled 
up in front of One World Trade Center behind numerous 
emergency vehicles, fire trucks and EMS vehicles that 
were already there. At that time we were just told -- 

Q. At this point what had happened; the first 
plane had hit? 

A. I'm sorry. The first plane had hit already. 

Q. That was the start; when you got there, the 
first plane had hit? 

A. The first plane hit. 

Q. The tower was on fire? 

A. Right. The tower was on fire. At that time, 
as we were there, we were told to set up triage right 
in the area where we pulled up at. During that time I 
saw numerous people just coming out of -- dropping out 
of the sky, I mean, actually jumping to their death, 



C. JACKSON 

landing all over the place, crashing through glass, 
crashing right on vehicles, on the street. We were 
just told to set up triage and wait for patients to be 
brought to us, but nobody brought us patients because 
there was nobody to bring out. 

I tried to use my cell phone, but I couldn't 
get any transmission. So myself, Decosta Wright and 
EMT Felton started to head over to the building across 
the street from where the towers were on fire. As we 
were heading over there, that's when I heard a big 
explosion. I didn't know what it was. We turned 
around and saw the second tower on fire and we started 
running inside the building and we just ran. It was 
like a maze. We didn't know where we were going. 

As we were running around in there, Decosta 
and I had scaled a fence inside there because 
everything was closed off inside, and as I scaled that 
fence, I turned around to see where Felton was. I 
couldn't find out where he was. So I turned back and 
ran back to see where he was at to make sure he was all 
right, and after that, I grabbed him, we all found an 
exit out of there. We went through some stairways out 
to the rear of the building. 

Q. Which building were you in, do you remember? 



C. JACKSON 

A. I'm not even sure. 

Q. It was across the street? 

A. It was across the street. We ran out through 
the other side, and as we exited that building, we were 
told to move our emergency vehicles from the front of 
the World Trade Center around the corner. 

Q. Who told you this? 

A. It must have been the Deputy Commissioner or 
something . 

Q. Was this on the radio or -- 

A. No, this was in person, physically. 

Q. Okay. 

A. So as we were moving the vehicles around the 
corner, like I said, I still kept seeing bodies jumping 
out of the windows and landing all over the place and 
glass and everything was flying all over the place, and 
we moved our vehicles around the corner and at that 
point we were told to move our vehicles further around 
the corner. I don't know what street that was. As we 
were moving our vehicles, my vehicle wouldn't start, it 
was down, mechanical, because the lights were on but 
the engine was shut off, and at that time all our keys 
were collected, so I wasn't able to move the vehicle. 

Q. Who had your keys, do you remember? 



C. JACKSON 

A. Somebody with a white shirt took everybody's 
keys . 

Q. Staging officer, I guess. 

MR. DUN: Was this still before the second 
plane hit? 

EMT JACKSON: No. This was after the second 
plane hit . The second plane must have hit when I heard 
the explosion when we were running in the building. We 
started moving our vehicles again and everybody else 
moved their vehicle. I tried to get a jump from 
another unit to move my vehicle. At that time the 
tower came down, was coming down, and at that point I 
just started running and everybody was ahead of me and 
I just started running, following them. When I looked 
back, you see the big --a cloud of like dust and 
buildings. It was like it was a giant mutation of 
something just chasing me. Everybody ran towards the 
water. I ran towards the water. Half the people ran 
downtown and half the people ran uptown, as you hit the 
water side. So I ran uptown and everybody else ran 
downtown -- no. Half ran uptown, half ran downtown, 
and I was just following the crowd. 

Q. You ran uptown? 

A. Yes. I was just following the crowd. 



C. JACKSON 

Everybody -- 

Q. Did that dust catch up with you? 

A. No, the dust never caught up with us. I saw 
people getting caught up from behind me who were slow, 
who were running slow or just didn't make it. After 
that point, we waited for the dust to clear, and then I 
went back to try to see if I could help anybody who 
needed help, and at that point I was met with another 
white shirt, an individual from the Fire Department EMS 
command, and I was told to join another group to set up 
triage downtown by -- there were two staging areas. 
MR. DUN: South Ferry? 
EMT JACKSON: South Ferry. 

A. There was one uptown at Chelsea and there was 
one at South Ferry. I was told to join the group down 
at South Ferry. At that point the second tower came 
down, so we started running again, and this time I ran 
downtown and not uptown. But this time I was further 
away from where the collapse happened. 

Q. When it started coming down? 

A. Yes. And the same thing again happened, I 
mean, you seen a big cloud of dust again. But I was 
nowhere near that. I went down to South Street to help 
out with other EMTs, set up triage. 



C. JACKSON 

Q. Were you hearing any radio transmissions? 

A. I heard a lot of radio transmissions. 

Q. A lot of radio transmissions? 

A. Especially when the first tower came down. 
All I heard was Mayday and 1Q13, 1Q13. I heard a lot 
of commotion, a lot of screaming, a lot of yelling, 
help, you know, a lot of calls for help. 

Q. Then you ended up you were at triage and were 
you receiving any injuries, people coming in? 

A. We didn't receive any injuries. The only 
thing, people kept asking was can they hold a face 
mask, a mask for the dust. That was about it. 

Q. How long did you stay there? 

A. I stayed there until 11:00 o'clock that 
night . 

Q. You weren't injured in any way; you were 
okay, breathing and everything? 

A. Yes. I just lost all my equipment, my radio. 

Q. And your vehicle, I guess; that was under the 
rubble? 

A. The vehicle was under the rubble, but they 
got it out like a week later. 

Q. Your partner was okay? 

A. My partner was okay. 



C. JACKSON 

Q. All right. Is there anything else you can 
think of that you want to add? 

A. I try to forget. 

Q. I understand. 

A. There's nothing else I could add or want to 
talk about . 

MR. CASTORINA: Okay. This concludes the 
interview. The time is now 0627 hours. Thank you, 
Mr. Jackson. 



File No. 9110171 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

EMT BRIAN GORDON 

Interview Date: October 30, 2001 



Transcribed by Nancy Francis 



B. GORDON 

LIEUTENANT DUN: Today's date is October 30, 
2001. The time is 0820 hours. I'm Richard Dun of the 
New York City Fire Department working with Murray 
Murad. We're here interviewing Brian Gordon. 

Q. Please state your title and your shield. 

A. EMT, 5546. 

Q. Can you give us the story or your account of 
what happened on the day of September 11th, 2001? 

A. Me and Brian Smith had just gotten back from 
a late job and we were -- we had come in and dropped 
off the vehicle, changed over vehicles because we were 
31 Henry, Tour 1. We had come into the station, did a 
few things, dropped off our equipment, and Brian -- we 
were leaving and we were walking up the ramp out here. 
We got into the parking lot and Brian said did you hear 
that boom? We had heard just a boom and we looked over 
and we saw a big ball of fire coming out of the tower. 

So we ran back down here and we said somebody 
just bombed the tower. So Lieutenant McCarthy gave us 
ambulance 217 and he told us be careful and go over, 
sign on, but be careful. 

Q. So your lieutenant told you you were going to 
be an extra unit? 

A. Yes. 



B. GORDON 

Q. Okay. 

A. I came out and checked out the ambulance real 
quick and Brian came out with all our equipment and I 
signed us on. As soon as we signed on, we said we're 
available, do you need us to go to the staging area? 
And they said yes. So we left from here and went into 
Manhattan and we were coming down -- 

Q. Which way did you come into the city; over 
the bridge or through the tunnel? 

A. Over the bridge. 

Q. Okay. 

A. I think we were coming down Church Street. 
I'm pretty sure we were because this is where Brooks 
Brothers is, right? 

Q. Right. 

A. Because I remember going past Brooks 
Brothers. Actually, like City Hall Park up here? We 
came down that way. 

Q. You came down Broadway and you cut across one 
of these streets. 

A. Yes. I think it was Dey Street. 

Q. Okay. 

A. There were people over here bleeding and 
stuff. We came down Broadway to Dey Street and -- 



B. GORDON 

what's that private ambulance company? 
Q. Metro? 

A. Metro Care. They had a patient here having 
an MI and they're like we need you guys to take care of 
this patient, and we were like, you know, we're BLS, 
too. We can't do nothing. Wait for medics. 

So we went down Dey Street to Church Street 
and we were coming down Church Street and I remember 
seeing like -- we were in front of Brooks Brothers, 
little steps there. There were like briefcases and 
people's breakfast and shoes we saw laying on the 
stairs and stuff. We had already gone past the 
intersection of Liberty and a police officer or 
somebody, it was either you or a police officer was up 
at the intersection. I can't really remember. 

LIEUTENANT MURAD: It wasn't me because -- 

EMT GORDON: You were down in the firehouse. 

LIEUTENANT MURAD: I was at the firehouse. 
PD had requested an ambulance to respond to the 
firehouse for a couple injuries. 

A. Yes. That police officer flagged us here and 
said we need you down at 10 and 10; there's people 
coming out of the Trade Center and they're hurt pretty 
bad. So Brian had to back up, so I jumped out and I 



B. GORDON 

ran, grabbed my tech bag and ran. 

Q. Towards? 

A. Towards the 10 house on Liberty. 

Q. So you ran west on Liberty to the 10/10 
house. 

A. I fell outside of 10 and 10. I stepped on a 
leg and I fell. There was debris just from the first 
tower all over there and everything. So I got up and I 
went into the 10/10 house and I saw Lieutenant -- 
LIEUTENANT MURAD: Murad. 

A. -- Murad. Then Brian backed the ambulance in 
and we started taking care of patients in there. Can 
we go into like what kind of injuries they had? 

Q. Yes. You know your stuff. That's the 
purpose of all this now. 

A. Out on the street, I remember I saw a little 
shoe that still had a foot in it, a little girl's shoe, 
and I could see body parts everywhere pretty much. We 
went in and there was a little Chinese lady and she was 
severally burned and Rob, that fireman from Commack, I 
don't know his name, he was already in there, too, and 
there were firemen from 10 and 10. I didn't see any 
guys from 10 Truck in there. I remember seeing guys 
from 10 Engine and I think -- 



B. GORDON 

LIEUTENANT MURAD: 10 Truck took off 
already. 

A. Yes. 

Q. So you saw the engine, but there were a lot 
of guys that were still coming in? 

A. Yes. I don't remember really seeing any guys 
from 10 Truck. Actually, I did. I saw one guy. He 
came in and just grabbed his gear and ran out. So that 
guy, Rob, told me what we had, and then Lieutenant 
Murad told me we had a guy in the back that was hurt 
pretty bad, had a broken hip. So I went back there and 
a little Chinese guy named Foo -- I can't remember if 
that was his last name or his first name -- was sitting 
in a chair and he wouldn't let me touch him and he 
wouldn't let go of his briefcase. I mean, I couldn't 
even take his vitals because he wouldn't let me go near 
him. So finally I basically forced him to move his 
hands so I could cut his pants and check his injuries. 
Then a fireman, he identified himself to me 
as Paul Pansini from 10 Engine, came and helped me put 
Foo in a KED. I put it upside-down with the head down 
here, to stabilize his hip, and he helped me hold him 
up and do all that. Then, as he was leaving, I said be 
careful out there, and he's not here with us anymore. 



B. GORDON 

So we got him in the KED and he still wouldn't let me 
anywhere -- he was guarding his chest with his 
briefcase. So I told him, I said, look, I've got to 
take your blood pressure. So he said hold on, hold on, 
and he snapped open his briefcase and he took a wad of 
hundred dollar bills, it must have been four or five 
inches thick, out of his pocket and threw it in there, 
and I looked in the briefcase and it was already full 
of hundred dollar bills, stacks of them, all the way 
across, with plane tickets and passports. There must 
have been $500,000 in there at least, if not like a 
million. He took two wads out like that and threw it 
in the briefcase. So I cut his sleeve off and took his 
pressure and he was stabilized. 

So Brian was working on the other patients. 
We started doing the triage tags. Then I went up 
towards the front of the building and I heard a loud 
sound and the second plane, I guess, had hit the Trade 
Center. I ran outside with Brian. We were looking and 
we were just like holy shit, you know, this is really, 
really bad. There was pieces of the plane falling, and 
I don't know if it was the plane or the building or 
whatever, but something hit the ambulance, too, in the 
front of the ambulance and like spiderwebed our 



B. GORDON 

windshield and everything and kind of caved it in a 
little bit. I don't know what it was, but I was told 
that it was a piece of the engine from the second 
plane. I don't know. 

So we went back in and kept working on our 
patients. I started doing all the triage tags and I 
went to work on the little lady, the little Chinese 
lady. The firemen had come back in, a bunch of 
firemen, and I guess went upstairs and stripped their 
bunks and brought down all blankets and pillows and 
stuff and rearranged some chairs and got everybody who 
was going to come, who was there, stabilized and 
whatever. I don't even know how long it was, but it 
was a while. 

Q. Did you get a lot of patients while you were 
there? 

A. I'd say between ten and 15 patients. It 
wasn't that many. I remember seeing a guy out in front 
of I guess it ' s 4 World Trade Center? Isn't that the 
one that was like -- or was that Tower 2? 

LIEUTENANT MURAD: I think that was Tower 2 
maybe. 

EMT GORDON: Because there was a man like 
trying to get in the doors of Tower 2 and I remember 



B. GORDON 

you or -- we were both yelling at him. 

LIEUTENANT MURAD: Right. There were the 
cops and we were all yelling at the guy to get away 
from there. 

EMT GORDON: Right. 

LIEUTENANT MURAD: Even the detectives that 
were over there. 

EMT GORDON: Yes. 

LIEUTENANT MURAD: I remember that. 
A. We were yelling to him get out, get away from 
the building, come over here, come over here, and he 
wouldn't leave. He looked like he was trying to get 
back in. Lieutenant Murad said there's nothing you can 
do, come back in here. 

So we were in there working on the patients 
some more, going around making sure that everybody that 
was in there was stable, taking vitals and wrapping up 
the little Chinese lady. It was a while after the 
second plane hit and firemen are coming in and out the 
whole time and there was a Captain, I think he was from 
Engine 10, he was in there most of the time. Actually, 
I remember, when we first got in there, the Captain 
from 10 Truck was in there just for like a minute and 
then he left, too. 



10 

B. GORDON 



LIEUTENANT MURAD: No. 

EMT GORDON: It wasn't him? I remember 
seeing some Captain from a truck company. 

Q. So you were in the house. You were treating 
patients. 

A. There was like no more patients coming. 
There was like nobody coming in. Nobody was -- I 
expected there to be thousands of patients. 

Q. Right. 

A. So I went out, you know, I stepped out of the 
bay and I was looking up at the towers and it was like 
raining paper and it was burning real bad and I started 
noticing people jumping. Then I went back in and I was 
tending to the patients some more and we get a report 
of a fireman down on Liberty Street west of the 
firehouse, and Brian told me to stay with the patients 
and he was going to go check on the fireman. 

So he went and checked on the fireman and 
then he came back and he said we're going to set up a 
rehab. He said we're going to go break into the snack 
trucks and take their Snapples and waters and stuff, 
and he went back out, and then like maybe a minute 
after he left, I heard the tower fall. The tower 
started to fall. It was like real loud, like the No. 4 



11 

B. GORDON 



train going over your head. They came running in and 
everybody was screaming the towers are falling, the 
towers are falling, run. 

So basically all the patients started getting 
up and running to the back and so did I, and the tower 
hit and it was like it picked me up and threw me. I 
had somebody land on me, a couple people landed on top 
of me, and I hurt my shoulder. It was like black. You 
couldn't see, couldn't breathe. My first instinct, I 
started screaming for Brian, my partner. I was really 
scared that he was dead because I knew he was outside. 
But he answered me and we found each other. He had a 
cut on his face. He was bleeding. 

It was just -- it was like being in hell. 
You couldn't breathe at all. You tried to get low to 
the floor and you couldn't breathe. So everybody got 
into the kitchen, in the kitchen of the 10 house. 

Q. That was in the back of the firehouse? 

A. In the back of the firehouse in 10 house, and 
there was a fireman back there screaming. He'd broke 
his leg. Brian was back there with me and there was a 
couple firemen and an officer. He was the Captain at 
Engine 10. I know that. Brian told me what we need to 
do is splint his leg, get a scoop stretcher, go out and 



12 
B. GORDON 



see if you can get anything out of the ambulance. 

So I went out to the ambulance and all my 
gear was inside the ambulance up in the passenger's 
seat. I'd lost my helmet and coat. So an officer 
yelled at me, told me to grab a coat and helmet off the 
rack and put it on, so I did, and I got out to the 
ambulance and the dust was like over my ankles. There 
wasn't any big pieces really in there, but like the 
doors -- 

Q. So after the building collapsed, you were 
able to move about inside the house? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Okay. 

A. So I got into the ambulance and I opened up 
the back. I was able to get into the compartment where 
they hold the long boards and stuff. I grabbed the 
scoop stretcher and grabbed some splints and some 
cravats, found my tech bag and... 

Q. Just treated patients? 

A. Yes. I started to treat the patients again. 
But after I got all that stuff, I set it down and I 
went to see if the radio still worked. 

Q. Did it work? 

A. Yes. The radio was still going in the 



13 



B. GORDON 



ambulance, but it was pretty fucked up. The whole 
thing was full of dust and it was crushed down in the 
front. So I radioed a Mayday. 

Q. On the portable? 

A. No. 

Q. On the vehicle radio? 

A. On the vehicle radio. 

Q. Okay? 

A. So then I went back in and Brian and I 
started cutting the fireman's turnout pants off of him 
and his boots and tried to get his leg as straight as 
possible, splinted him up. There were a few other 
firemen that were helping us with the scoop stretcher 
and moving things back so we could get around him. 

Q. Were there a lot of civilians in there as 



well? 



there. 



There was -- yes. All our patients were in 



Q. So you had a lot of civilians and some 
off-duty MOS? 

A. Yes. The guy who was hurt told me he was a 
cadet. That's all I remember. I don't remember his 
name or anything. The back window was blown out and 
everything and by now there were more firemen and 



14 
B. GORDON 



stuff. Not everybody was in that kitchen as far as 
firemen go. They were going in and out through the 
kitchen and into the doorway on the left. It looked 
like there was a stairwell in there. There was like a 
whole company of firemen showed up at the window, so we 
were passing out patients through the window and then 
we passed the fireman through the window. 

Q. Now, the second building was still up? 

A. The second building was still up. 

Q. Okay. 

A. Then I don't even know how long it was, it 
was a while we were doing all this, and then the 
Captain, he was the last one in there with us and he 
told us we've got to check the building, make sure we 
don't leave anybody. So I went out into the bay, 
checked the bay, make sure there was nobody out there, 
and that's when I heard the second tower start to 
fall. So I ran down the hall and Brian came out it 
looked like from the stairwell area and the Captain was 
there with him and we went into the bathroom and laid 
on the floor in the bathroom while the tower was 
falling. That was it. I said we're dead. 

The tower fell, it got black again, but this 
time we had cling wrapped around our faces as masks, 



15 
B. GORDON 



and we weren't dead, it was just black. Then it 
started to die down a little bit and we got up and we 
said that's it, everybody out of here because the 
building, it sounded like the building was groaning. I 
don't know if that was the building or what was outside 
or whatever. But we jumped out the window and there 
was Foo right underneath the windowsill with Rob, and 
the Captain came out and I had grabbed a hook because 
somebody left a pole in there, and the Captain started 
going off with the other firemen, so I gave him the 
hook and I said, here, you might need that and waved 
good-bye. 

I had managed to grab my tech bag, too. So 
we made our way, me, Brian, Rob and Foo, up Cedar 
Street to, I guess -- 

Q. Trinity? 

A. Trinity? Is this still Church Street? 

Q. Yes. 

LIEUTENANT MURAD: Church turns into 
Trinity. 

A. Okay. So it was Trinity Street, then. We 
walked Foo -- with his frigging briefcase, you know, he 
couldn't walk, so we had to carry him. We tried to 
carry him one arm over each other and he had that 



16 
B. GORDON 



frigging briefcase, it hit me in the face. So I just 
said, Brian, let go of him, and I fireman carried him 
for a little ways and I put him down and then Brian did 
it and we took turns. 

We made it up to 2 Rector Street and I 
noticed there was people in the lobby in there and the 
lights were on and it was clean in there. So we 
brought Foo in there and sat him in a chair. They had 
the radio on and everything in there and we were 
hearing reports of hijacked airplanes and this, that 
and the other thing over the radio, and then the 
Pentagon got hit, and the security officer at the desk 
or the fire safety officer, whatever he was, said that 
there was somebody on the 7th floor having chest pains, 
and he said there was nobody up working above the 7th 
floor. So I ran up to the 7th floor and there was just 
an older guy in there and he was having it looked like 
an anxiety attack or something. 

Q. Were the elevators working in that building? 

A. Yes, they were working. But I didn't know if 
the building had been hit with debris or anything else, 
so we told the safety officer to turn off the 
elevators, lock them down in the lobby. I came back 
down and I met Brian in the stairwell and he said, 



17 
B. GORDON 



look, he said, we've got to get these people out of 
here. This was on like the second floor. So we came 
back down to the lobby and we told the guy to put an 
announcement over for all the people in the building to 
come down to the lobby. 

So people started coming down the stairs and 
we went back up the stairs and we were checking the 
floors. So all these people were standing in the 
lobby, there must have been maybe a hundred in the 
first group, and Brian jumped up on the security desk 
and was like giving them orders, directions and stuff. 
We gave Rob our stuff. 

Then there was cops outside and they came in 
and they said just come out the door and go straight 
and head towards the light, you know, that's the way 
out of here. So we had Rob go with the first group out 
and we waited for more people to come because there was 
still more people coming. We were waiting. We 
couldn't carry Foo anymore. So we waited, and then a 
cop car pulled up outside, so we went out and stuffed 
Foo in the cop car. Then we came back in and another 
cop came in and there was like probably about a hundred 
people in the lobby and they didn't have anything to 
cover their faces with, so I took off my shirt and 



18 
B. GORDON 



handed a lady my knife and I said make some dust masks 
out of it. 

The cop led that group of people out, and we 
made one last announcement and we waited like five more 
minutes and nobody else came down, so Brian and I went 
outside and that's where we met with Lieutenant Murad 
again. I thought he was dead. I lost him after that. 
I didn't see him again. But seeing him was like seeing 
Santa Claus. I was happy. He told us he had a car 
just a couple blocks away. 

So I don't even know which way we walked. I 
know we walked by a church. 

LIEUTENANT MURAD: We made it down to Pearl. 

A. Pearl? 

Q. (Inaudible)? 

A. Yes. We walked and we walked and walked and 
walked and then walked some more, and my ankle was 
really hurting. So I told Lieutenant Murad, I said, I 
can't walk anymore, you know, I need to sit down for a 
minute, and he said, all right, you two wait here and 
I'll go get the car. So we waited there and we sat on 
a vendor's table, a guy selling belts, and Lieutenant 
Murad came back with his car, it was all fucked up. 
The back window was smashed in, it was full of dust and 



19 
B. GORDON 



debris, it was all crunched up in the back. 

Q. It looked like a Rolls-Royce, I bet. 

A. Yes. It was like a Sherman tank to me. I 
didn't care. So we got in and we drove and we got to 
100 Wall Street and we saw a conditions boss, an EMS 
conditions boss, Conditions 55. 

Q. You don't know his name, do you? 

A. No, I don't. Brian would remember his name. 
We talked about him this morning. He had braces. He 
was kind of a dork. 

Q. Okay. 

A. We identified ourselves as EMS and he told 
us, well, good, because we've got a patient for you. 
So we went into 100 Wall Street and there was a lady in 
there, she was having a legit anxiety attack, you know, 
there wasn't nothing wrong with her. I mean, we didn't 
have any equipment. He took his oxygen. He was like, 
all right, go take care of this patient, but he left us 
with nothing. I was like whatever. 

She sat there and she was talking to us and 
she was more concerned about us. I don't know, we sat 
there for it must have been an hour, hour and a half it 
seemed like. Brian kept using his portable to radio 
out, 09, we need an ambulance at this location, what's 



20 
B. GORDON 



the ETA? All I kept remember hearing is there'll be 
one there when it gets there, basically. 

So an NYPD traffic van pulled up outside and 
Lieutenant Murad was outside and I was like, we need to 
get back to Brooklyn. I don't even know what time this 
is. This is maybe an hour or two after the second 
tower fell. I'm not even sure. But we were hurting 
pretty bad. So we wheeled this lady in her chair out 
and they put her in the traffic van. 

Then Conditions 55 pulled up again and he's 
like, I'm ordering you to go to the hospital with the 
patient, you need to go to the emergency room. I was 
like, no. Me and Brian were both like, no, we need to 
go back to our station, and he was like, I'm ordering 
you, and we were like, basically, what I'll do is 
(inaudible), you can kiss my ass. I'm sorry I may get 
a CD out of that but -- 

Q. It's okay. Listen. In times of crisis, all 
bets are off. 

A. Exactly. So he said whatever, just get back 
to Brooklyn then and make sure you go to an emergency 
room. So, you know, yes, sir. He said go that way to 
the pier. 

Q. Which was South Ferry? 



21 
B. GORDON 



A. Was it South Ferry? It's right down from 
Battalion 4. 

Q. Probably South Ferry. 

A. Probably. I know it was on the East River. 
We made it down to South Ferry. There was a ferry slip 
there and there was like thousands of people there. It 
wasn't too far we had to walk, but it seemed like 
miles. There was a bench down there at the right end 
of the ferry slip, and we sat on the bench and cops saw 
us sitting there and so they all ran over and they were 
like, oh, are you guys all right, are you all right? 
People were handing me cigarettes because my cigarettes 
were in the ambulance. A priest came over and he gave 
me my last rites. So at this point I'm thinking, damn, 
I must be pretty fucked up. Do I got something 
sticking in me or something? 

So the cops basically carried us, escorted us 
up to the ferry to Brooklyn. They called it back 
because it had just left. We got on the ferry and -- 

Q. The PD boat, right? 

A. No. We initially got on the ferry and people 
started running up to us, clapping, cheering, crying, 
giving us water bottles and water and everything. Then 
PD came back on and took us off and brought us to the 



22 



B. GORDON 



end of the slip there and the harbor patrol boat came 
over. I guess it's harbor patrol. 

Q. Yes. PD boat. 

A. PD boat. They put us on the PD boat and 
brought us to the Navy yard. We got off at the Navy 
yard and I remember looking back across the river and 
just seeing a huge billow of smoke and dust and it was 
horrible. Then some guy in a van -- 

Q. You ended up in Brooklyn? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Where in Brooklyn; by the Navy yard? 

A. In the Navy yard, where the Fire boats are. 

Q. Okay. 

A. There were no Fire boats there, but that's 
where we got off. There were the firemen all there 
from -- I guess they were from the boats and they 
helped us off the boat. A guy -- I don't remember 
where he was from. I think he was from Cumberland 
Hospital, in a Cumberland Hospital community van or 
something. He picked us up and he brought us down here 
to the station. 

We came in the station and everybody saw us 
and started like freaking out. Not freaking out, but 
they were like are you guys all right, are you guys all 



23 
B. GORDON 



right, giving us 02 and making us drink saline. 
Somebody gave me a thing of saline to drink and I 
almost threw up. So our superior officer, Captain 
Fried here, ordered us to go to the emergency room. So 
they long boarded us and collared us and the whole nine 
and put us in an ambulance and brought us to KCH, and 
they took care of us at KCH. 

They admitted Brian. They released me. I 
told them I wanted to stay with Brian because the whole 
time when we were at the Trade Center and everything, I 
kept telling him -- he's like, oh, I've got to go out 
here to do this, I've got to go out here to do that. 
So I was getting mad at him. I was like, you're my 
partner. I ain't going to leave you. I'm coming with 
you. He's like, no, you've got to stay with the 
patients. So my partner was fucked up and I wasn't 
going to leave him. Some doctor was like, well, no, 
you can't stay with him, you've got to leave, and I 
basically told him go fuck himself, started getting in 
an argument with him, and that Captain -- what's her 
name? Red hair. 

Q. Gloffke. 

A. Gloffke. She pulled me aside and talked to 
that doctor and they're like, all right, you can stay 



24 
B. GORDON 



with him. So they brought me back here and I took a 
shower and I went back and I stayed with Brian 
overnight, and that's when we were actually watching 
CNN, watching the towers fall, when the plane hit it, 
over and over and over and over again, and that's when 
his mother-in-law called him and asked him if he'd 
heard anybody from hazmat, and that's when he realized 
his father was there. So he called hazmat and his 
father was missing and he was pretty upset. I feel bad 
for him. I knew his father for years and years. He 
was a good man, wrote the manual on 288, hazmat. Good 
man. Basically, they released him the next day and we 
came back to the station and we went home. 

LIEUTENANT MURAD: Okay. That concludes the 
interview and -- 

LIEUTENANT DUN: Just one quick question. 
When the initial call came in, were you operating on 
Citywide? 

EMT GORDON: Yes. 

LIEUTENANT DUN: From the beginning? 

EMT GORDON: Yes. When we logged on, we were 
on Brooklyn North, and then we said we're available, do 
you need us to go to the staging area? They said yes, 
we do, switch to Citywide, so we switched to Citywide. 



25 

B. GORDON 



LIEUTENANT MURAD: Okay. 

LIEUTENANT DUN: The time is 0910 and that 
concludes the interview. 



File No. 9110172 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

CAPTAIN JAY SWITHERS 

Interview Date: October 30, 2001 



Transcribed by Elisabeth F. Nason 



J. SWITHERS 

MR. MURAD: Today is October 30, 2QQ1. The 
time is 14 hundred hours. I'm Murray Murad with 
George Cundari of the Fire Department of New York 
City. I'm conducting an interview with -- 

MR. SWITHERS: Jay Swithers, Captain of the 
Bureau of Health Services of the Fire Department. 

MR. MURAD: This is being conducted at the 
Bureau of Investigations and Trials regarding the 
events that took place on September 11, 2001. Go 
ahead . 

MR. SWITHERS: On the morning of September 
11, which happened to be my 40th birthday, I was 
hanging out downstairs in the Bureau of Health 
Services down on the second floor, having a donut 
and coffee. My pager went off, indicating there 
was a plane into the building in the World Trade 
Center. At that point I looked into the lounge 
area where they have a television and I saw the 
gaping hole in the north tower. 

At that point, I prepared my equipment, I 
changed into my urban search and rescue uniform, 
including boots, EBU pants and work shirt and 
carried my equipment, all my equipment down to my 
office. I then went up to RCC to see if they 



J. SWITHERS 

implemented or contacted the Urban Search and 
Rescue medics, to see if there were any orders 
given at that time. There were no orders given. 
I looked for transportation to get to the site. 
When I returned down to my office where my 
equipment was, I was told that a second plane had 
hit the south tower. 

At that point, I picked up all my equipment, 
big duffle bag and started to run to the bridge. 
I was prepared to run over the Brooklyn Bridge; 
however, I was stopped by a police officer who 
told me to wait and that something would be coming 
over the bridge to drive me over. I was picked up 
by a city car, black unmarked, Crown Victoria with 
lights and sirens, which came to a skidding halt 
in the third lane of the Brooklyn Bridge and the 
man opened up the door and said get in. 

I opened up the back door, threw my equipment 
into the back seat. He asked me who I was. I 
told him I was a paramedic and he proceeded to 
drive across the bridge. As I got to the other 
side, he got on his PA and was screaming get out 
of way, I have a paramedic on board, all the way 
down to the World Trade Center. 



J. SWITHERS 

Q. Was he a police officer? 

A. I don't know. He was a guy in a suit. He 
dropped me off at the corner of Vesey Street and 
Church, where I was able to see a small triage center 
set up one block away on Church and Fulton, directly in 
front of the Millennium Hotel. 

Q. Who was there? 

A. Janice Ocheski. There were also the 
paramedics from the Bureau of Health Services. Corey, 
what's Corey's last name. I don't know. 
MR. MURAD: Romanowski. 

A. Bonnie. 

Q. Regan? 

A. Regan. And Carlos Lillo was there with us, 
and one of my employees who works light duty, Farouk 
Mohammed. There were a lot of other people there but 
those are the ones that I remember. 

Q. At the triage center? 

A. Manny Delgado was there, Dr. Cherson was 
there, and about 20 people all together in the 
contingency. While I was there, my primary goal was to 
try to find Chief Downey, because Chief Downey is the 
Chief of Special Operations Command and that's who the 
USR paramedics would report to. Nobody could tell me 



J. SWITHERS 

where he was. Most of the EMS people didn't know what 
special command was or who Chief Downey was. 

I realized they were overwhelmed and I 
proceeded to help them. One particular person that 
came to mind was a very obese African American woman 
who came out of the building and was being assisted by 
other people when she sat down on the wall in front of 
the Millennium Hotel. When I went over to her, they 
said that she has asthma. She was hysterical. I 
listened to her lung sounds. Her lung sounds were 
clear. I prepared to calm her down and was giving her 
oxygen. When I was giving her the oxygen, setting up 
the tank, you could hear a loud rumble. Somebody said 
run for your life. I turned to see who was yelling 
run. 

At that point I looked back and most of the 
people who were triaged in that area with the triage 
tags on them got up and ran. I took a quick glance at 
the building and while I didn't see it falling, I saw a 
large section of it blasting out, which led me to 
believe it was just an explosion. I thought it was a 
secondary device, but I knew that we had to go. 

When I looked down at my patient, she was no 
longer there. She had already ran and I started to 



J. SWITHERS 

run. I ran eastbound on Fulton Street, but I only got 
to the loading bins of the bays of the Millennium 
Hotel. At the loading bays of the Millennium Hotel, 
there was a large truck backed up to the bay door, 
which was closed. I dove into the back of the truck 
and you could see everything getting real real dark and 
the sound of large pieces of metal were falling all 
over, making loud pinging noises, just all over, all 
around the vehicle. I managed to crawl up to the 
garage door and cupped my hands in front of my face, 
between my face and the door and at that point it was 
like a major storm had hit; continuous blasting of 
debris hitting my face, hitting my body. It was like a 
major storm. 

I had my helmet on and the only thing I could 
breathe was if I was just breathing dirt. I was 
breathing dirt and for the few moments I was breathing 
dirt, I prayed that if I was going to die I wouldn't 
suffocate and I prayed that if I was going to die - the 
large I beams were falling and I could hear them - that 
one of them would hit me and not let me suffer. I had 
no clue what had happened. It became very very dark 
and I just struggled to breathe. At that point 
thoughts went through my mind such as I should have 



J. SWITHERS 

stayed in the office. 

Also the fact that I was going to die on my 
birthday was horrible and that I couldn't remember if I 
actually kissed my kids in the morning or last night. 
Numerous thoughts. 

When the sound had stopped, my ears were 
ringing. It was so loud and it was real real black and 
I felt somebody grab my helmet and say we have a 
firefighter here. He could help us out. I didn't tell 
him I was a firefighter, but I didn't know if I could 
see or if I was alive. I said is it real dark or am I 
blind. The voice came back and said it's just really 
dark. The group of people said what do we do. They 
were hacking and coughing. I didn't know what to say, 
so I said we need to know how many people are here. 
Count out loud. The first person counted one. The 
second person counted two. The third person counted 
three. I was about to count four when somebody else 
counted four. I was again about to -- and this went 
all the way up to nine. I didn't realize there were 
nine people there. 

Q. All in the loading dock area? 
A. All in the loading dock area. They cried 
what do we do. We stayed there a moment and nobody was 



J. SWITHERS 

really trapped. We were able to see a little orange 
with about a foot between the top of the truck and the 
dirt and we realized we weren't trapped. Everybody 
pushed their ways through into the orange and they were 
able to see just enough to get out. Everybody had dirt 
and soot all over them. Some of them were bleeding, 
but they took off up the block. I remember getting out 
and being really confused and turning back and looking 
at building number 5 and just seeing orange and feeling 
heat, not knowing what was going on, or if it was on 
fire. 

I started walking east. As I walked east I 
approached a Fire Department command car, a Suburban 
with the lights on and the engines running. I saw 
someone who I figured to be a police officer, take his 
gun out of the holster and start whacking the drivers 
side window. I said stop, what are you doing, he said 
we are just trying to get out of here. I said don't do 
that and he wandered off. As I walked up the street I 
tripped over a television camera for a television 
network that somebody had dropped. I proceeded up to 
the corner of Broadway and Fulton, where I found 
Lieutenant Bruce Medjuck. Lieutenant Bruce Medjuck had 
a radio, which I didn't have. We decided we were going 



J. SWITHERS 

to regroup. We saw very few EMS people. The only EMS 
people I remember seeing at that point was Lieutenant 
Patrick Scaringello, and he insisted that we should try 
to salvage a vehicle that was on fire on Church 
Street. 

I told him there was no reason to try to 
salvage a vehicle. We didn't know what had happened 
and he sort of wandered off. We agreed that we were 
trying to regroup. Patients were just coming out of 
the woodwork; some badly injured, some being gathered, 
carried by citizens, some being carried by civil 
service workers. We decided to put them into an ATM on 
that corner, at the corner of Fulton and Broadway, 
where there was an ATM machine, a little area that we 
could put people. We started to place them into that 
area. 

Within a few moments, I regrouped with Bruce 
Medjuck and I asked him to tell them on the radio to 
send us MTA buses to get people out. That didn't 
happen. But one thing that did happen was an ambulance 
pulled up which was very clean. So I assumed that the 
vehicle had not been in the - what I thought was an 
explosion at the time, but was the first collapse. 

When the ambulance pulled up, two EMTs jumped 



10 

J. SWITHERS 



out. They gave out simple face - dust masks to people 
and people started to charge the ambulance. One man 
was actually brought over in a wheelbarrow. When the 
people started to charge the ambulance, they started to 
climb in. There had to be maybe 5, 6 patients in 
there, when the original African American, heavy set 
black woman came to me and she was once again crying. 
I was actually happy to see her because I knew that she 
had survived the collapse and I knew she was the one 
person that I was primarily responsible for. Although 
later on, and I knew at that time, that there were 
people in that triage area that probably did not 
survive because they were not able to get up. I knew 
that one person did survive. 

I wasn't able to lift her because I didn't 
have the strength, but I helped her get up on to the 
back step of the ambulance and pushed her into the back 
of the ambulance while the EMTs in that ambulance were 
crying no more, we are full, we are full, no more. I 
pushed her and she wound up laying on the floor of the 
ambulance. I was just about able to close the door of 
the ambulance by pushing her feet in a little further. 
I had to push her feet in and close the door. At that 
point, I asked Bruce Medjuck do we have tracking on 



11 

J. SWITHERS 



this ambulance and he said tracking, it's like the end 
of the world. This is a major disaster. Just get them 
out of here. I agreed. 

While standing there once again trying to 
figure out what to do next, I saw car 33, which is the 
medical car that is the doctor's car, Crown Vic from 
the Bureau of Health Services that the doctor drives 
around. The Bureau of Health Services pulled up just 
behind the ambulance. Inside that car was Dr. Ortiz. 
She is a female doctor that works in the Bureau of 
Health Services, a driver and 3 firefighters were 
sitting in the back seat of the Crown Vic, one of which 
I know very well. She had only opened up the window 
maybe 3 quarters of the way and she was holding her 
jacket in front of her face not to get the debris or 
dust that was in the air into her airway. 

I told her that many people died, a lot of 
people from the Bureau of Health Services seemed to be 
dead, I don't know where they are. They seemed to be 
missing. I don't remember saying there was a 
collapse. I remember saying I don't know what 
happened. It's real real bad. At that point they had 
told me we will pull over and help you. I told them we 
were regrouping. They said they were going to pull 



12 
J. SWITHERS 



over and help. They turned the vehicle left so they 
were facing east on Fulton and pulled over. When they 
started to get out of that vehicle, which I didn't see, 
but they told me later on, that that's where the second 
building, building number 2, the north tower, started 
to collapse. 

I immediately just started to run, first 
north and then east on to Ann Street. As I was running 
I was looking over my shoulder and I heard the rumbling 
and I saw the cloud chasing me very quickly with 
debris. Once again falling. I saw a bunch of people 
standing in a loading bay with the door halfway down 
saying come in here, follow me in here. When I got 
there the man said let's pull down the door. There had 
to be ten of us trying to pull down the door. As we 
were pulling down the door the cloud and the thrust of 
the cloud knocked us all down to our knees and it 
continued to blow continuously into this bay door. 

The people in the back were screaming. I 
managed to get back up from my knees to my feet and 
grabbed the door and looked over and there was maybe 
only three or five guys left trying to pull the door 
down. As we continued to try to pull the door down, 
the door actually started to go up. I didn't realize 



13 
J. SWITHERS 



it was going up until I realized I was off my feet. I 
said I had to let go. I anticipated landing on my feet 
but with the continuous thrust of the air coming 
through, I actually wound up face down on my helmet. I 
was stunned and confused, why was I down. I didn't 
know if I was dead or what was happening, once again 
taking in a lot of the dirt. I didn't know what to 
do. Somebody grabbed the back of my collar and dragged 
me down the loading bay to safety. 

At that point I didn't need their help any 
more and they were strangling me and finally let go of 
my collar. I could get up. We entered down into the 
main hallway of the building. We got into the building 
and another group of people found the door into what 
seemed to be Genovese drugstore. We went into the 
Genovese drugstore and a large group of people pushed 
for the Poland Springs water that was on the shelves. 
A security guard that didn't know what was happening in 
the store said stop, what's going on, are you all 
crazy. A police officer pulled out a gun and pointed 
it at the security guard. These people need the 
water. Don't you understand what's happening. The 
security guard said he didn't know what was happening. 
He said it's quite all right. Have all the water you 



14 
J. SWITHERS 



want . 

I was confused. I didn't know what was 
happening. I looked out the windows of the store. 
Complete blackness. Not knowing what was happening. I 
started to walk through the store and realized there 
were a lot of things that people could use in the 
store. I found small duffle bags. I took three or 
four of them off the shelf. I was stuffing water and 
Band-Aids, some things as ridiculous as Tampons, making 
goodie bags for people to take out with them and for 
myself. 

I prepared the bags and the people then 
rushed the door. There was a police officer standing 
in the doorway and said nobody will leave the room, 
nobody will leave the store. At that point I figured 
maybe I will call my wife. I picked up my cell phone 
and I managed to get through. My wife picked up the 
phone. She was hysterical crying. I told her I was 
okay. At that point I asked her what had happened. 
She told me that they are gone. They are not there. I 
couldn't imagine that both the buildings were gone. 

I said what are you talking about. Are the 
children gone? What you are you talking about. She 
told me the buildings are gone. I said what buildings 



15 
J. SWITHERS 



are gone. She said the World Trade Center is gone. I 
said how do you know. She said I have seen it on TV. 
She was watching regular TV and switched to CNN because 
she lost regular TV. She told me not more than two 
floors of that building could be there. I was 
stunned . 

At that point somebody yelled that there was 
a bomb in the building that we were in. The police 
officer opened up the door and let people out. I asked 
if there was anybody left in that building. They said 
there were a couple of people maybe in the basement. 
So I ran down into the basement, maybe three floors, 
and there were a couple of maintenance workers who 
apparently didn't speak English. I told them they had 
to leave the building and there was probably a bomb. 
They looked at me and said that they had to clock out 
first or check with their supervisor. 

I said I'm telling you to leave. I'm 
leaving. You can stay as long as you want, but I'm 
leaving. I ran upstairs and I left the building. 
There was no bomb in the building. 

When I got outside I met up with EMT Farouk 
Mohammed, who happens to be an Islanmic Muslim, which I 
didn't know at the time. He happened to work light 



16 
J. SWITHERS 



duty with me in the Bureau of Health Services because 
of a shoulder injury. He was walking with two men and 
had a plastic garbage bag and was giving out water and 
rags to people in the street. He approached me and 
gave me a big hug. He asked me if I was okay. I told 
him I had ringing in my ears but I seemed to be okay. 

At that point we met up with Manny Delgado 
and Dr. Cherson and they told us that the people were 
grouping at South Street Seaport, which was east, so we 
started to head east. While we were heading east, 
Farouk was able to hand out water and rags, but we had 
no other equipment available. People said to us what 
do we do, what do we do. I told them it was in their 
best interest to run northeast, to get out of there. 
We had no medical equipment. 

When we got up to, I guess Pearl Street and 
Fulton Street, a man came to us and said that he had an 
OR available in one of the stores, I guess a clinic. 
All we needed was equipment and people. I said that we 
didn't have equipment or people, but I would keep that 
in mind. We walked another block east, right up to the 
edge of South Street Seaport where the plaza is and 
that's where I saw car 33 up on the curb. It looked 
like it had crashed into a pole or something. It was 



17 
J. SWITHERS 



sitting there. Nobody was in it. These were the 
original people I saw. 

We waited there for 2 or 3 minutes. We 
couldn't figure out where they went, so we continued. 
When we got to South Street Seaport, somebody told us 
that's not where they were. The people were regrouping 
at the ferry terminal. Farouk Mohammed and I walked to 
the ferry terminal and started helping with a triage 
center with very few patients. It was at that point 
that we got separated and I was asked to go up to 
Chambers and West for UCAR responsibilities. I got a 
ride from a Lutheran Medical Center ambulance as far 
north as possible to that area. 

I walked up there. That's just about my 
story. 

Q. Did you have any portable radios or radio 
contact with anybody? 

A. I had no raido contact except when Bruce 
Medjuck was standing next to me at the -- well, I had 
radio contact through people while we were doing triage 
in front of the Millennium and following that the only 
radio contact I had was through Bruce Medjuck, who got 
on the air and said I have Captain Swithers with me and 
we are trying to regroup. 



18 
J. SWITHERS 



Q. That was at Citywide? 

A. I don't know what it was done on. 

Q. You never saw EMS Chiefs or Chief Downey? 

A. Thank god I never had the opportunity to see 
Chief Downey. I didn't see any EMS Chiefs until I 
regrouped at the South Street Seaport and that's where 
I saw Chief McCracken for the first time and Chief 
Vallani. 

MR. CUNARDI: I would like to thank you 

Captain Swithers. The time is 1425 hours. This 

now concludes the interview with Captain Jay 

Swithers . 

THE WITNESS: I saw Chief Vallani and Chief 

McCracken at the ferry terminal. Just a 

correction. I said South Street Seaport. 



File No. 9110173 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

EMT VERONICA JACOBS 

Interview Date: October 30, 2001 



Transcribed by Elisabeth F. Nason 



V. JACOBS 

MR. ECCLESTON: Today's date is October 30, 

2001. The time is 2155 hours. I'm Christopher 

Eccleston of the New York City Fire Department 

World Trade Center Task Force. I'm conducting an 

interview with the following individual. 

Q. Please state your name, title and assigned 
command area regarding September 11, 2001. 

A. My name is Veronica Jacobs, Battalion 58. 
I ' m an EMT . 

Q. Also present at this interview is? 

A. Christine Bastedenbeck of the New York City 
Fire Department, World Trade Center Task Force. 

Q. Veronica, were you working on the morning of 
September 11, 2001? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Were you assigned to the World Trade Center 
disaster? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Can you please tell me in your own words 
about the events of that day? 

A. Well, when I got home from walking the circle 
with my son and my neighbor told me that a plane 
crashed into the World Trade Center. So I went inside 
to watch TV to see what happened and I called my 



V. JACOBS 

Battalion to see if they needed to me to come in. I 
spoke to Lieutenant Hoover who told me yes, come into 
the Battalion and work overtime. 

So anyway I took a shower, got dressed and 
jumped in my car and proceeded to come from New Jersey 
to Brooklyn. When I got to the Goethals Bridge there 
was a checkpoint with state troopers and police 
officers who were checking vehicles and stopping 
everybody and checking ID. I told them that I needed 
to proceed over to Brooklyn to work overtime for the 
World Trade Center and they told me you are either 
going to the World Trade Center straight from here or 
you go home. So I told them to lead the way. 

I got a police escort from the Goethals 
Bridge to Beekman Hospital, and I parked on the 
sidewalk and they parked next to me on the street and 
we walked with my thumb out to the World Trade Center, 
at least towards the blackness, the darkness. We 
couldn't see anything. There was so much debris and 
dust everywhere. 

We went inside Beekman first and I got a 
couple of maps, I tried to call the Battalion and tell 
them I was in Manhattan instead of coming to Brooklyn, 
but the phone was busy, so I proceeded with them to try 



V. JACOBS 

and find the EMS command, wherever that could have 
been, because we couldn't see street signs. 

When we got I guess about two blocks from the 
World Trade Center, I couldn't tell you what street we 
were on. 

Q. Do you know about what time this was? 

A. It was about 9:05. 

Q. 9:05? 

A. Yes. There were people running towards us 
and telling us they needed help down that way and 
pointing behind them, so we proceeded to go down that 
way, hoping there was EMS or somebody there. 

When I finally realized where I was, I was 
standing in front of the building that didn't come down 
yet, the tower that didn't come down yet, not even 
knowing that the first one came down. I didn't know 
what it was that they were running from. 

I look up and I'm like this looks like the 
World Trade Center. I think we should just back up and 
start looking for my command, and the trooper was like 
okay, let's start walking. All of a sudden a large 
rumbling and people were running and jumping and 
hitting the floor next to me and it just got black and 
gray and I couldn't see and I was running for my life 



V. JACOBS 

with my hands in front of me, because I didn't know 
what the hell was happening. 

We tripped and we fell and I lost the 
troopers and I don't know where they went, but they are 
alive, I ended up finding out, because their car was 
gone when I got back. So I assume they are alive. 
Their car is gone, so somebody got it. 

When I finally got out of the dust, tripping 
several times and crashing into telephone poles as I 
was running, because I couldn't see, it cleared up 
about 10 minutes later, but as I'm running I'm trying 
to help people who needed help to run or to walk or 
just to breathe, trying to cover them with my shirt or 
whatever I could do, because I had two masks on my face 
from the hospital. 

When I realized what happened, we walked 
around, I guess Vesey Street or something like that. 
That was the only street sign that we could see. I 
don't know how far that was from the World Trade 
Center, still to this day. But we walked around the 
corner and I could see the first building that fell and 
they were telling me this is the building that fell, a 
couple of firefighters, and they said how they lost 
their people in the first building and I was like well, 



V. JACOBS 

what did we just run from. I guess we went almost back 
to Beekman, halfway back to Beekman, and we met up with 
some firefighters there. I'm saying we. It was me and 
a couple of firemen that made it out I guess. 

They said the second building came down. I 
was like oh, my god, I just saw people standing in the 
lobby, fire engines, everybody was pulling up still and 
I saw a bunch of firefighters going in and I am like 
well, why are they going in. Why would they be going 
in there you know, it's just not safe. You know, can't 
they fight the fire from above. When I got there and 
boom, it started falling and I was like, I know they 
didn't come out, you know. 

Anyway, I start walking around trying to find 
anybody that looked familiar, because you couldn't tell 
who was who. Everybody was full of soot and dust. As 
I'm trying to find the EMS command or whoever I could 
find, we were saving people, pulling people from rubble 
and there were private ambulances everywhere. They 
were the only ones up front. So as we are pulling 
people out of the rubble or walking past we are just 
throwing them into ambulances, on the floor of the 
ambulances, two people on the stretchers, anywhere we 
could. 



V. JACOBS 

We pulled out this obese man. He had to be 
like four or five hundred pounds and that's the only 
thing that saved his life. They pulled a beam off of 
him. It took 20 firefighters to pull this beam off of 
this guy. We threw him on the stretcher and we had to 
carry the stretcher everywhere. Because the debris was 
so much, you know. It was just horrible. 

After several hours of saving people and 
pulling people from the debris and still walking, every 
time I tried to leave to find EMS, they needed more 
help, so I couldn't just leave, you know what I mean. 
I just kept doing what I was doing. 

I guess it was about 4 hours later, maybe 
about one o'clock, I finally walked back and they told 
me several blocks back there are some EMS people. 
Maybe they are your bosses that you are looking for. 
These are totally different people now. Like I met, of 
course, several firefighters and -- okay. 

I'm a spaz since then too. I hear noise, you 
know. Holy shit. 

Well anyway, I ended up, there were fire 
engines set up with those spouts of water, little eye 
wash spouts of water, off the side of the trucks and 
I'm washing my face and my eyes are burning and I can't 



V. JACOBS 

breathe good and I'm full of soot. Some firefighter 
blew me off with a compressor so that I could actually 
see and wash my face. 

I finally ran into some academy people. It 
was Gio. 

Q. Pineda? 

A. Yes, Pineda. Rolando. Paramedic EMS 
Rolando. Him and a -- it was all paramedics. There 
were about 5 of them. 

Q. Rolando Gardon? 

A. He was the instructor. I don't remember his 
last name. Well, he was a paramedic instructor. 

Q. Big Asian guy? 

A. Yes, with glasses. He looks Hawaiian. Yes, 
so anyway, I ran into them and I told them what 
happened. They are like okay, just hang out here. Do 
you need any help. I'm like I just really need to sit 
down and get some water. They got me water and we were 
just waiting, I'm like you guys got to go in. You 
know, there's people in there that need help and you 
are just standing here and there is private ambulances 
in there that just can't handle it. 

They don't know what to do. There is no 
supervision. Everybody was killed that was 



V. JACOBS 

supervising, or at least knew what to do. You need to 
go in there. They are like we can't go in there. They 
were just standing there. You have to stay right 
here. What? I'm like what do you mean. Go a couple 
of blocks in, they need help, they need ambulances. 
I'm telling you there is people laid out in the street 
that need to get the hell off and they can't move. 
Their legs are broken. Their arms are broken. They 
can't move, they are trapped, they are pinned and these 
people will be salvageable. Let's go. 

Oh, we can't do that. I'm like, okay, so I'm 
going back. If you don't want to, I will. Just give 
me some shit, give me some oxygen, and some equipment. 
I will go back in. I don't care, you know. They were 
like you can't do that. You have to stay here or you 
are going to be relieved of duty. I'm like relieved of 
duty. I just fucking worked 4 hours by my god damn 
self. If you relieve me now I don't give a shit, you 
know what I mean. I will go back in on my own. I 
don't care. I worked without any equipment. I had no 
equipment on me. No helmet, no nothing. I came from 
home to come here. 

After about an hour and a half of sitting 
there like assholes, we finally got the word that we 



10 
V. JACOBS 



could go up closer, which is Ground Zero now, and the 
triage area, I set that triage area up. We had the 
morgue inside the building. I set all that up the 
first day. They are still utilizing it today. 

It was just wild, you know. It was just 
wild. All the bodies and people. It was really -- I 
mean, do I want to add anything. Probably not, but I 
could chat for days about this shit. It was so 
disorganized and there was no help, you know. I was 
there until one o'clock until the morning with not a 
sign of relief in sight. 

I come back here. I finally left on my own. 
I told them look, I can't stay here any more. I need 
to leave. I worked 10 to 6 the night before, went 
home, walked my son, took a shower, came back and 
worked all day and all night again. It was one o'clock 
in the morning. I couldn't work any more. You know, I 
was on the my feet the whole time. My heel is killing 
me since then. I don't know what happened to my heel, 
but I finally left and they wouldn't even give me a 
ride to Beekman Hospital. 

I had to walk from Ground Zero to Beekman 
Hospital to my car and I didn't even know which way to 
go, where to go, who to see. You know, I'm asking all 



11 

V. JACOBS 



these Captain and Chiefs who are standing there hot 
shit trying to look cute, how do I get back to Beekman 
Hospital. Can you get me a gator or anything. I don't 
care what, a crane, anything. Just bring me to 
Beekman. I'm exhausted. No, you have to find your 
way. I'm like okay. 

So I walked all the way back to Beekman and I 
got in my car and I had to dust it off, because there 
is like a foot of debris on it. I came back here, 
because I couldn't go home like that. I was so filthy 
and disgusting, I had to shower before I went home in 
case I was exposed to something. 

I got back here and everybody was sitting 
here. 50 people in there. I'm like what the hell are 
you all sitting in there for. Oh, well, we are waiting 
to go to Ground Zero. I'm like what? What are you 
waiting for? Well, there is a bus outside, it's 
empty. A city bus sitting outside empty, waiting to 
leave with people with their equipment and they are on 
overtime sitting here watching fucking TV. When I just 
worked damn near 24 hours straight and I'm so tired and 
so sick and so exhausted, and there is more people that 
need help with no relief in there and they are sitting 
here . 



12 
V. JACOBS 



So I asked the boss, do you know what's going 
on, why aren't they going. You know, oh, well, we are 
not allowed to. What? Again, stupidity. What do you 
mean you are not allowed to. What are they supposed to 
do there, just sit there and just keep working without 
relief and they are like, well, that's what we were 
told. 

They are pissed off and they are all asking 
me what happened and my side and I'm like, you know, I 
need some food. So Joe Michel went to McDonald's and 
got me a couple of Big Macs. I put my feet up and I 
got a massage. I ate a Big Mac and I told everybody 
how it was there and they were like wow, I think I was 
the only person that went. Maybe Greenberg went 
later. I know he wasn't there in the beginning. I 
didn't see him at all there, and I saw every EMT and 
EMS person that was there that day. I didn't see him. 
Where the hell he could have been I don't know, you 
know. 

That was a fucking experience. Fucking. I 
hope they like my language. It was definitely an 
experience. So to this day I'm a spaz. I hear noise. 
I'm like okay, where is it coming from, you know. 
There was thunder, I will never forget. I was home I 



13 
V. JACOBS 



guess the week after that, and thunder, there was this 
horrible storm that came through and I'm at home and 
I'm finally in my bed and I'm like okay, I can't sleep, 
everybody is knocked out and all of a sudden this big 
kaboom. I was in my bedroom and I have a ranch, a long 
ranch. My room is here, my daughter's is here and my 
son's is here and my son was sleeping with my daughter 
that night. 

I got out of the bed, that boom, ran and 
scooped the two kids up and jumped on top of them. 
They are like, ah, what's the matter? I'm like what 
was that? My husband is like holy shit, you need to 
see somebody about that. I'm like I'm okay. If they 
are okay I'm okay. I'm like a spaz, you know. I just 
scooped them up and I'm laying on them. They are 
crying, what, what, my daughter is like oh, my son is 
like oh, I'm like shh shh shh shh. It was horrible. 

And I still do that, you know. They are 
demolishing buildings over by where I live to build a 
new mall. I'm like, what was that, you know, like 
commando on the floor. Come on baby, let's go. You 
know, it's wild. 



V. JACOBS 



14 



Q. Who? 

A. I don't even know. ^^^^^_^^^^^_ 
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^| We 

it was (inaudible) . 

Q. At work you mean? 

A. Yes, at work. 

Q . (inaudible) ? 

A. I don't know. I don't know. It's just weird 
you know. But I don't really have anything else to 
say. I guess I'm done. 

Q. Do you have anything else you would like to 
add to this interview? 

A. 



No, 



MR. ECCLESTON: This interview is being 
concluded at 2210 hours. 



File No. 9110174 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

EMT TRINH DINH 

Interview Date: October 31, 2001 



Transcribed by Elisabeth F. Nason 



T. DINH 

MR. DUN: Today is October 31, 2001. The 

time is 705 hours. My name is Richard Dun of the 

New York City Fire Department, working with Marisa 

Abbriano, also with the New York City Fire 

Department . 

Q. We are conducting an interview with? 

A. Trinh Dinh. 

Q. Battalion 44, and what is your shield and 
your -- 

A. My shield is 5423. 

Q. Could you please state in your own words what 
happened on September 11, 2001 of this year? 

A. Okay. I start my shift at 8 a.m. in the 
morning. That day I was working with a different 
partner, who has been on the job for 11, 12 years. We 
had our first job somewhere in north Brooklyn. 

Q. Who was your partner's name? 

A. Ronald Coyne. I don't know if he shows up on 
your list. We were on our way to the hospital with our 
patient when his cellphone rang and it was his wife 
telling him that she saw two planes crash into the 
World Trade Center on TV. 

As soon as we got to the hospital, my partner 
said he was going to call Brooklyn central to see if 



T. DINH 

they needed to send us down to Manhattan. As I just 
got taken care of the patient as fast as I could so 
that if we were sent, that we could just leave. 

I took care of the patient. He came back and 
told me that Brooklyn central definitely said yes, to 
head down to Manhattan. They specifically told us to 
arrive at Church and Vesey. So my partner was 
driving. We just -- I believe we took the Brooklyn 
Manhattan Bridge. 

Q. There is a Brooklyn Bridge or Manhattan 
Bridge. 

A. The Brooklyn Bridge. Yes, I believe that's 
the route we took, but we pretty much got down there in 
probably less than 10 minutes. On the way up there we 
saw the two towers in flames. They hadn't collapsed at 
the time. They were still in flames, the top one third 
of them. Just a lot of commotion. A lot of cops in 
the streets directing traffic. I don't think we ever 
made it to Church and Vesey. 

Somehow we made it probably right before the 
second tower collapse, I see at 9:55, the first tower, 
excuse me, the first tower, at 9:55, we went up to the 
West Side Highway to the entrance to the underground of 
the parking lot. As soon as we pulled up there, we 



T. DINH 

just saw this cloud of black smoke coming our way and 
we just stopped dead in our tracks to where we were. 
We didn't even just drive any closer. We just stopped 
and let the black smoke just come over our vehicle. We 
sat there for maybe like two or three minutes in the 
blackness. 

Q. Was that the first collapse? 

A. That was the first collapse. As soon as we 
pulled up that's when the black cloud just came over us 
so we just stopped. As it cleared up a little bit, we 
started to see people like in the white dust. They 
were just kind of like walking towards the vehicle. At 
that time, we just kind of walked out of the vehicle 
and just started telling people to come to the 
ambulance and just sit there for a little bit, if you 
needed any oxygen. If you wanted to clean your eyes 
out and just -- all of a sudden just all these people 
started coming out. A lot of people. 

Q. Was there a lot of chaos and mayhem going on 
through the streets at this time? 

A. I wouldn't say mayhem. I think people were 
mostly walking out. They weren't really running out. 
They were just walking towards us. They were all 
covered in white dust. 



T. DINH 

Q. Did you see a lot of debris when you were 
pulling up to the site? 

A. Yes. That's exactly why we just stopped 
where we were, because it just came at us so we just 
stopped. There was a doctor in the back of our 
vehicle. We picked him up on the way. 

Q. Department doctor? 

A. No, it wasn't a Fire Department doctor. She 
was some kind of, I don't remember what kind of doctor 
she was or who she worked for, but she just flagged us 
down and asked if she could come with us. So we let 
her in the back of the ambulance so that while me and 
my partner got out, she was in the back just kind of 
helping the patients. 

We were telling her where all the --we 
stocked everything, all the sterile water, how to use 
the oxygen. We just told her, you know, give whatever 
they need and stuff like that. At that time, me and my 
partner were kind of going back and forth from the 
vehicle to the building. My partner was actually 
inside the building, I believe, and I was just kind of 
going back and forth between him and the vehicle, 
because every time I went up there, he would always 
tell me go back to the vehicle, get me more oxygen. Go 



T. DINH 

back and get me more of this, get me more of that, more 
of that. So I was kind of running back and forth. 

I guess maybe half hour, 45 minutes must have 
passed. I went back to find my partner because he 
hadn't come back to the ambulance for a while. I guess 
he just wanted to stay inside the building and help 
there and as I was going to the building to find him, 
everybody started saying turn around, the second one is 
going to fall. Of course I wasn't paying attention. I 
was just like well, where is my partner, I got to find 
my partner, I got to go, you know, find where he is in 
the building. 

I just kept going, I just kept going and then 
all of a sudden everyone just started running the other 
way and I just kept going forward. Then I saw another 
cloud of black smoke coming my way and that's when I 
turned around and started running back to my ambulance. 
Q. Did the cloud catch you? 

A. Oh, yes, the cloud caught me, but then I went 
in the back of my ambulance and we sat there for a few 
minutes and it was really thick. This one somehow was 
just thicker than the first one. This one really made 
me choke, even in the back of the ambulance. 

I was back there taking some oxygen with some 



T. DINH 

of the people. I waited a few minutes for it to clear 
a little bit. Then I walked forward, more towards the 
building and I just started asking firemen and people, 
you know, did you see my partner and this and that. 
You know, nobody was really answering. They were just 
kind of all in their own little -- you know, doing what 
they were doing . 

Q. Did you ever move your ambulance? 

A. I never moved my ambulance from where we 
were, because when we first got there the black cloud 
came over us and we just stopped. 

Q. That was on West Street, like that 
underground parking? 

A. Uh-huh. So I always wonder, if we had just 
shown up a minute earlier, we would have just been 
right up there in the front where the other ambulances 
were, because when the cloud cleared and I went towards 
the front, I saw all the ambulances parked like not 
even a hundred feet, maybe closer than we were and they 
were all torched and destroyed and nobody was in them 
and fire trucks destroyed and I was like oh, my god, we 
were just like not that far back and we could have been 
this close. 

It was perfect timing for us I guess. I just 



T. DINH 

kept looking for my partner and in the midst of it, 
everyone kept saying, you know, can you help this 
fireman, can you help that fireman. Even though I lost 
my partner I guess I just continued to help some of the 
firemen that needed it. You know, I mean, there was 
this one fireman who had a fractured femur. They kept 
saying bring your bus over here so you can take him in 
the hospital. I said okay. 

So I went back to get my vehicle and my 
vehicle was gone. My mistake was leaving the vehicle 
with the keys in it running. So I guess -- 

Q. That's not a mistake. 

A. I mean at that time, I guess -- I mean when I 
needed it, I didn't have it. 

Q. Yes. 

A. But I guess someone else just decided to take 
it for their use and another EMT probably took it for 
their use and took off with it. So I didn't have an 
ambulance for my fireman. At this time I didn't see 
any other EMTs around. I guess they all just took 
whoever and left and I was the only one left. 

Then all of a sudden this volunteer ambulance 
came up the ramp and I flagged him down and I asked him 
if he could take my patient to the hospital with me, so 



T. DINH 

we took our fireman to Beekman. 

Q. Do you remember the name of the Firefighter? 
A. I just remember his first name was Kevin. 
That's all I remember. Then somehow, some medics came 
and they came with us too and we took him to Beekman 
and as soon as we went to Beekman, I actually ran into 
a medic that I know who works right here in Brooklyn 
for St. Marys. I ran into him and I was like, I lost 
my partner. He said yes, I lost my partner too. He 
said let's work together. He says I have an 
ambulance. 

So at that point I wanted to call my 
Battalion to tell them that I lost my partner, that I 
don't know where he is, that I'm fine, but they said 
that none of the phone lines were working because, you 
know, no reception, nobody's cell phones was getting 
any reception. My cellphone I left in the ambulance, 
okay. All my equipment was in the ambulance. 
Everything that I had. That's why I don't have any 
equipment right now. So I couldn't make any phone 
calls to the Battalion. 

So I just went out with this medic, Roger, he 
is English actually. So we went out to his bus and we 
said what do you want to do. I said let's just drive 



10 

T. DINH 



around and see where we can help, you know. So we just 
drove around and just kept driving and I don't know 
exactly where we ended up, but we ended up right there 
in the middle of the rubble, where Ground Zero is, 
where everybody is working at right now. 

We just ended up there, there was no other 
EMTs or medics there at the time. 
Q. Was the radio working? 

A. Yes. You know, I don't even remember because 
you just don't even think. You are just like in there 
in the midst of everything and you are just kind of 
like continuing to do what you do. So we just stayed 
in the rubble and we tried to set up a triage there 
because nobody else was anywhere giving us directions 
or telling us where to set up triage because nobody 
else was in the middle of the rubble but us. 

So we just left our ambulance there and we 
just pretty much just watched until some of the firemen 
decided they needed their eyes washed or they needed 
oxygen. They would, you know, take turns coming in, 
going into the rubble, cleaning it out and then coming 
out and getting their eyes washed and getting oxygen, 
getting cuts cleaned up, and then eventually as time 
went on, more EMTs and more medics started coming to 



11 

T. DINH 



where we were and then we just started setting triage 
there. 

We just laid everything outside around the 
ambulances. Everyone was just working from there. 
Then I saw my partner. This is like three or four 
hours later. We were so happy to see each other. He 
got out okay, which is good. Then we all just stayed 
in that level for a couple of hours, helping pretty 
much firemen, you know, just pretty much firemen was 
all that we were really helping. 

Q. So nobody tried using the radios to get 
directions? 

A. Well, I know my partner had lost his radio, 
because I believe he was in the building and whatever 
happened I'm sure that he lost his radio. My radio, 
the battery, I believe had died. Because from 8 to 4 
o'clock in the afternoon, that's a lot of hours. 
Usually you kind of change batteries during the day, 
but my battery had died eventually and then eventually 
the cell phones started working, so then I started 
using other people's cell phones to call home to tell 
them that I was okay. 

But I never called the Battalion because at 
the time, when everyone started coming to the rubble, 



12 
T. DINH 



they had Lieutenants there who set up a triage center 
and they told everyone to sign in with their unit. So 
that's what me and my partner did. We went to the 
Lieutenant, we gave him our name, our shield and bus 
number. 

Q. What unit were you that day? 

A. My unit is 38 Eddie. I'm always 38 Eddie. 
So we were 38 Eddie that day. We signed in so we 
thought everything was clear. Everything was good, you 
know. Unfortunately, because I guess of the 
catastrophe and just all the chaos, somehow they never 
seemed to tell my Battalion that we had signed in, so 
by the time I got back at the end of the night, 
everyone had thought I had been missing all day. 

Q. There was a lot of miscommunications. 

A. A lot of miscommunication . I mean it upset 
me, because if I had known it would have been such bad 
miscommunication, I probably would have thought to call 
them myself since the cell phones were working. 

Q. You did the right thing. 

A. Yes, so we stayed at our station doing what 
we did all day long. After a couple of hours we said 
let's just take a break. We went over to Beekman 
Hospital and we just kind of sat outside on the 



13 
T. DINH 



sidewalk for a little bit. That's when you kind of 
start like looking back at everything that happened, 
because when you are in the middle of the rubble, you 
are kind of just kind of like, you are not even in 
shock about everything. 

You don't know what's going on in the outside 
of the world. People are coming back with these 
rumors, like oh, my god, they got the Sears tower in 
Chicago. Oh, they got the Pentagon. Oh, they got the 
White House. Everyone is thinking, you know, all these 
crazy attacks and you really don't know the truth 
because there is no TV, there is no radios. You are 
just kind of listening to what people are saying and so 
you just don't know what else is going on out there. 

You are not really shocked at that point. 
Then like when you step back away from the site, Ground 
Zero, you just kind of think like oh, my god, did this 
really happen, like, look at us, we are like covered in 
white dust. We look like crap, we look like we just 
went through a war, you know. 

Then at that point it was like bad timing. 
All of these news people and newspaper reporters just 
kind of came up to us, I guess because we looked the 
dirtiest, you know, because we were the only ones 



14 
T. DINH 



covered in white and they just kind of all just kind of 
came to us and just all of them just started 
interviewing us, like what happened, were you there, 
you know, did anyone live, did you see any of this. 
Blah blah blah. 

So we just gave them a little bit of, yes, 
this happened, that happened, we were here and we were 
there. This is what we think about it. You don't 
really want to say too much. You really haven't 
collected your thoughts to really give a story or how 
you really feel. You are just kind of like yes, it was 
unbelievable. Yes, so a couple of those reporters came 
and started talking to us. 

After a while we went back to the rubble and 
at this point there were many EMTs and medics in the 
triage station and pretty much nobody was really doing 
much, you know. I mean there really wasn't much to 
do. Like I said, all we were really helping were the 
firemen and they were little minor injuries, like 
washing out the eyes and stuff like that, so I mean, 
there really wasn't much to do, so by the end of the 
day, say around 9, 10 o'clock, we just looked at each 
other and said we are tired, there is not much we can 
do. There is no one here we can really really help. 



15 
T. DINH 



So we just decided to head back and my 
partner and I, my original partner and I, said to the 
medic that was working with us all day, could you drive 
us around and help us look for our ambulance. At this 
point we had no way to get back to Brooklyn. 

So we just drove around the hospitals and 
streets and miraculously we found our ambulance in 
front of the Staten Island Ferry terminal. I don't 
know. They had used it for equipment, water, soda, I 
guess, like, you know, refreshments, just drive back 
and forth to people and it was destroyed pretty much. 

It was covered in white dust. All my 
equipment was gone and the battery had died, so the bus 
didn't start anyway. We couldn't get it started so we 
just asked the medic to drive us halfway to Brooklyn. 
He lived in Manhattan, borderline Brooklyn and so he 
drove to us his place and we called our station at that 
point to say can you get somebody to come pick us up at 
his house. 

They sent, you know, a Lieutenant to come 
down and pick us up by car. They took us back to 
Battalion 58. I met my Captain and all the other 
Lieutenants . 

Q. By Woodhull? 



16 
T. DINH 



A. No, it wasn't the hospital, Woodhull. It was 
another station here in Brooklyn. It was either 57 or 
58 where they were all stationed doing whatever they 
were doing. It was probably around 11, 11:30 at this 
point and the Captain and some of my Lieutenants were 
like, what happened. We thought you were missing, you 
are on the missing list. We didn't hear from you all 
day. 

The Captain said, but then I saw you on TV so 
I knew you were alive. I go okay. They made us go to 
the hospital to get checked out, to Kings County. I 
had my eyes irrigated for like half an hour. My 
partner had really bad asthma so he was admitted 
overnight . 

You know, basically that was it. I was just 
really tired. I just wanted to go home. I don't think 
I got home until like 2:00 in the morning. It was just 
a really tiring, really tiring. That was basically all 
we did all day. The excitement was obviously in the 
morning, but after that all happened, it really wasn't 
much more we could do. We just pretty much hung around 
and did little things. 

I mean during the course of the day, we 
started going to pharmacies and they were giving us 



17 
T. DINH 



medication for free, so we kept bringing back eye drops 
and you know, Excedrins and Advils and burn cremes, and 
little medications like that that they were giving for 
free, so we just kept stocking up on it and just kept 
bringing those back. 

Then you had some volunteer, I guess they 
were just normal pedestrians who were coming back and 
forth giving us bottled water and whatever, Gatorade or 
little candies, stuff like that, but by the end of the 
day, you had trucks of Poland Spring pulling up and all 
these other foods and, you know, the Coast Guard 
bringing up food by the water. 

At that point at the end of the day, 
everybody was getting stocked with supplies by each 
company. So that was nice. That was it. That was 
just a really long day. Really long day. I mean I 
just slept all day the next day. All day. 

MR. DUN: This ends the interview. The time 
is 723. 



File No. 9110176 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMT EMILIO PEREZ 
Interview Date: October 31, 2001 



Transcribed by Elisabeth F. Nason 



E. PEREZ 

MR. RADENBERG: Today is October 31, 2001. 

The time is now 0603 hours. I'm Paul Radenberg of 

the Fire Department of the City of New York. 

Q. Conducting an interview with? 

A. Emilio Perez, Battalion 14, shield number 
3132. 

Q. Okay. Mr. Perez is an EMT. We are currently 
at EMS Battalion 14. This interview is being conducted 
regarding the events of September 11, 2001. Okay, 
Emilio, if you begin with when you were assigned to the 
job? 

A. Okay. The morning of September 11 we were at 
a restaurant called Sunlight located at 149 Street and 
Walton Avenue. We were ordering breakfast. At about 
9:35, about 9. It was 9, about 9:10 when the first 
tower was struck. We realized it on the television as 
posted. We noticed that everyone was watching. At 
9:10 the plane flew in through the second tower. We 
were assigned to the assignment from that time on, from 
9:10 on. 

We responded to the incident via Central 
Parkway, down Broadway, came across Houston Street, 
turned left on Greenwich and started approaching the 
scene. When we approached, we could see the towers in 



E. PEREZ 

flames. We got closer, we made a right turn on Barclay 
Street. Parked on West Street off of Barclay at about 
9:35. 

One of the officers told us to approach the 
scene, park the vehicle and just set up. My immediate 
supervisors requested to find out where the triage site 
was located and I mentioned to him where it was located 
but he told me to respond to it and I refused to. I 
set up triage at that area where (inaudible) should 
be. 

We started unloading the equipment to set up 
for the incident and I think it was about 5 minutes 
after we set up the equipment, we started approaching 
to try to assist those injured, we saw the building 
collapse. Plenty of firefighters reported in. We were 
following them and as a cloud of soot and smoke started 
approaching us, we turned around, abandoned the 
equipment and started running. We ran for our lives, 
as far as we could. We kept looking back, looking 
back. 

We noticed that the cloud was so thick and 
deep that we were overcome by it, so we started to turn 
around, walking back to try to help people, but there 
was so many people to help, so many firefighters. They 



E. PEREZ 

were full of soot. 

Initially in our area was plenty of 
firefighters and that's all I could see. They all 
wanted to find out where all the men were. So our 
initial response there was to treat all of them that 
were injured, coming towards us. Their eyes were 
burning, they couldn't breathe. So we were using 
saline, we were using the little bit of equipment we 
had. Saline, we were dousing them. We were able to 
open up the back of the vehicle to try to get more 
access to equipment, but we were overcome. 

We realized that -- I realized there wasn't 
going to be enough water to help the firefighters for 
cleaning the soot and debris from them. What I did was 
I approached one of the fire Lieutenants and started 
screaming to him, I need a wrench, I need a wrench. 

The men were going right back in. So he 
stopped them and like two of them just dropped. Got me 
the wrench. I started opening up as many hydrants as I 
could in that area. I opened up like a good, a good 11 
hydrants . 

Then I was directing all the firefighters to 
go on into the areas where I was telling them to go 
douse down, this and that, but they were concerned for 



E. PEREZ 

the firefighters, so I says to them, listen, all your 
friends are all over there. All your men are right 
there by the hydrant. Just go over there. You will 
find them. Just by me directing them in that direction 
and being -- using the tone of voice that I did, it 
helped them because they approached -- but they didn't 
find the men they were looking for, they were being 
taken care of. 

The FBI was there. The CIA was there. Guys 
with suits there. They were telling me who they were 
and I was directing and grabbing them and all I could 
do was just grab them and direct them to water. So 
then after I realized that, we just kept helping, kept 
helping, kept helping, we tried to make another 
approach to go back to assist those that were 
underneath the collapse. 

So when we tried to make that second approach 
is when the second tower came at you. The Engine 
Company that had gone into the right side was just 
wiped out. As the second one collapsed, we just 
started to turn around again. It was here we go again, 
start running. This time we were engulfed with the 
stuff. People were behind us. We started running as 
far as we can again. Now we couldn't see much. This 



E. PEREZ 

was like about a good, a few minutes after the first 
building had collapsed. 

There is a whole lot of things were going on, 
you know, people were running out of there. There was 
firefighters with police officers and firefighters just 
trying to set up. Some of them, it just overcome. As 
these guys got cleaned up and they were ready to walk 
right back in. They were like let's go. Some were in 
groups ready to go in and once that second building 
collapsed, and then people started running, more 
firefighters were coming out filled with the soot. 
People were running, so this time we started running so 
far that the cloud was still following us, you know. 

There was a building over there. I think it 
was the school. I think it was Stuyvesant. They said 
run inside, run inside. So the clouds kept coming 
closer, we just kept -- I stopped, my partner stopped, 
we just kept directing people into the building. I 
think to Stuyvesant Street, Stuyvesant High School. 

So I remember the last person I ran into was 
an oriental. I told my partner at the time, go ahead, 
check inside, see how many people in there. He told me 
there is thousands of people inside the school. I 
stayed outside. I kept running back trying to help 



E. PEREZ 

more firefighters, I felt like hours -- there was no 
help for them back there. So I just kept grabbing them 
and directing them to all the hydrants, kept washing 
them down, you know. 

Then about a good 10 minutes or 15 minutes 
after the whole incident, my partner came out of the 
building. I didn't know where he was at. I started 
going back to the ambulance to see if he had moved it. 
After the first collapse I went back to move the 
ambulance to a safer location, brought it back a little 
further, when I realized that I found him and I tried 
to make an approach. 

Then again, this is like about the fourth 
time after carrying everything. I grabbed an 02 tank. 
I told him grab a tank. We put masks, we took the 
non-rebreather masks that we keep as equipment. I 
threw an 02 tank on my shoulder. We took the 
stretcher, full of soot and all that. We was trying to 
make an approach toward the building. 

I was overcome because I knew that alot of 
firefighters were caught under there. I didn't want to 
say they were dead because I had hopes for them. I 
didn't want to just count them out just like that. So 
we started walking in. There was a fire Captain, he 



E. PEREZ 

stopped us in our tracks, got a few feet going north 
towards the towers. 

He says where are you going with that 
stretcher? I says we are trying to help. He says you 
can't help anybody down there. He said don't go in 
there. He turned us around. That's when we just 
abandoned everything, you know, hell with it all. 

I was so full of soot. I was trying to wash 
up and everything. Then I had it in me to return back 
and the ambulance was like --it was just --if you 
could see the amount of debris that was on the 
ambulance. I'm surprised I drove the vehicle, I just 

-- that I had it in me to get out of there. Then I 
get the keys and moved it back a little. As I parked 
the vehicle after we moved it again. Three or four 
times we moved the vehicle. 

We went to one of the immediate supervisors 
that worked there, just saying what are we going to 
do. He says oh, well, just stay there. At that time 
someone came running out of left field. I don't know 
who the hell it was. Must have been a police officer. 
He said there was a gas leak. He said there was a gas 
leak. Man, there was like about three or four police 
cars that just took off. One took out a private 



E. PEREZ 

ambulance's door. The other ones just was diving into 
the car and going. 

I find that at this time, you know, there was 
all -- there was too much chaos going and the only 
thing I could think of was to board the vehicle, but at 
all times I was monitoring the radio. We weren't able 
to transmit at all. The only transmission I made was 
when I requested additional units, because we had 
plenty of firefighters that were injured. I think I 
was the only one that made the call. Might hear it on 
the tapes, might hear it on the radio, when you listen 
to 14 David, was the unit. 

I requested additional resources, because we 
had many firefighters that were injured at that site. 
I was calling from Barclay and West. That was the only 
transmission I made. We really weren't supposed to 
make any transmissions, so I made the transmissions and 
then after that it was all silence. You didn't hear 
nothing . 

Then after this guy comes screaming about gas 
leak, I jumped on the vehicle, all sooted and 
everything, we just started driving up Broadway. We 
drove up Broadway, we stopped. My partner was too -- 
you know, he was worried, he wanted to contact his 



10 

E. PEREZ 



family. I just continued driving. You could just see 
the smoke and the soot just flying off the ambulance. 
I'm surprised it drove. Parked. Here were people 
trying to take the stuff from the ambulance, can we 
take stuff from it. They were collecting from it, 
grabbing cups, you know. We stopped at a store to get 
some water. 

We stopped at a store that was -- some gas 
station over on Broadway. I walked in to try to get 
some water. You know, and what really hit me was that, 
you know, you would think that after the ordeal, 
somebody would just say here, take the water, go 
ahead. No, I paid for the water, you know. I don't 
want to mention of what nationality I purchased this 
water from. So I continued from there on. 

We had heard over the air, they said respond 
to Chelsea Piers. From there on you would get further 
info. We drove up there, there was a good hundred 
ambulances. We were at the tail end. I got out of the 
vehicle and started walking around. I was in a 
trance. I was, you know, nobody asked me anything. 

People could look at me I guess and say you 
know I guess I was in hope. I have pictures there of 
how I looked when I returned here. So then I 



11 

E. PEREZ 



approached --we were there for hours. The ambulance 

-- you could see the ambulance. We were still 
collecting soot from the top of the ambulance while we 
were parked by Chelsea Piers. People were putting 
stuff in their pockets and walking away. 

I had fellow co-workers that they wanted a 
piece of the World Trade Center as a remembrance. So I 
said, to hell with it. We waited, we waited for 
hours. Then I approached one of the supervisors and he 
said, it's impossible to be relieved from the scene so 
(inaudible). They disregarded our request. Within the 
lines, the front lines they started moving units, so 
when we approached our turn, I spoke to Lieutenant 
Nevins. I said can you release us from the scene? No, 
join the party. Just park over there. 

I didn't get that. People make remarks, but 
for me it wasn't that kind of remark to be made. After 
what I went through, I didn't want to hear something 
like that. I wanted to hear you know, man, thank god 
you made it or something to the fact that what 
happened, just somebody to listen, say let me tell you 
my part of the story. 

Okay. You can return back to your Borough. 
I took the ambulance right from Chelsea Piers, drove up 



12 
E. PEREZ 



the West Side Highway with all the soot spraying 
everywhere. I told my partner, Maximo, you going to do 
this? Everybody was going, you don't know what's in 
this stuff. 

You know what, if I stayed there, if I did 
not made the approaches I did, I would have been 
looking, considered missing. I could have left the 
vehicle stranded. I could have abandoned everything, 
but there was something in me that just drove me to 
come back here. They always say, I remember when I was 
growing up, you get in trouble, you always run home. 

So my first thing was to come right back 
home. I brought the ambulance back, drove back to 
here. When I got off here and they said, oh, you was 
down there. People were very fascinated by the ordeal 
and knowing that I returned back with the vehicle. 

Then I was here for hours, you know. I 
didn't know how to take my uniform off. I showered 
here and I had worked overtime that day too. It was an 
overtime shift, thinking I was going to be in the 
slowest unit that morning and it just so happened it 
was that call. Then when I ended up, when the whole 
situation happened, then I come back and recollect, you 
know, for a few extra dollars I could have lost my 



13 
E. PEREZ 



life. 

You know, when you start analyzing things you 
see it differently, but in the heat of everything, I 
never had such an ambulance ride in years, because I 
work midnight shifts now. Driving down there through 
Broadway, and hearing all these emergency vehicles, you 
know, I realized that my skills are there, I mean, but 
I have to pull them out the pocket. The way I drove 
down there through cars, through cabs and through 
people. As you see the people on Broadway, how they 
were approaching, get out of the way. 

You could see something major had happened, 
because the people in the streets were just like 
clearing the way, go ahead, you know. Something that 
no matter how many times you speak about it, it's 
always something that comes back to mention, because 
there were so many things that happened in that 
incident. I can recollect more as I continue to go 
on . 

Driving to the scene I only wish I had a 
camera, because when I parked right in front of it, I 
could see the flames and the fire and I realized I was 
so close. That's when I knew that I had to make a 
move, being so close, so that's why I made that right 



14 
E. PEREZ 



turn and parked there, Barclay. 

You know, when the supervisor -- I'm not 
insubordinate, but when the supervisor told me -- asked 
me where was the triage area, I mentioned to him. I 
says Rector and Vesey. You have to go there. I said 
no, I can't. I got to set up right here. Look at 
these firemen. Look at all of them. There is about a 
good hundred of them. 

There is no -- there was somebody standing 
back there with cameras and things, walking back and 
forth. There was one guy who followed me throughout 
the whole incident, snapping pictures, videotaping, 
back pedaling. Every time I looked he was right 
there. But, you know, these guys are -- I am so into 
my job. My job is not law enforcement, so I just look 
to help whoever is coming over. 

So as I was helping the next fireman, this 
guy was snapping pictures, so I think for every 
firefighter that I think that I was helping, this guy 
must have had many photos of me and that's the only 
thing that I keep recollecting, that if I can only get 
this guy to get me a copy of this picture to see myself 
going through this whole deal, because I (inaudible). 

I see the photos of the chaplain when he was 



15 
E. PEREZ 



being carried out and it was similar. When I look at 
that photograph, I did that for a lot of firefighters. 
I mean I tried to come back with --my only concern at 
the time too when the first building collapsed, is when 
I was really with my partner. 

I held him tight, I ran with him and I told 
him -- he kept looking back, and I told him look, just 
don't trip. Told him one time, don't trip. I was 
holding him in the back and as we kept running, I 
mentioned that statement. Had he tripped I know I was 
going to leave him. Because there was concern for my 
life. I was worried about me. 

From then on I just -- what I'm going through 
now is being reborn. I find myself to be more in the 
gym. I'm working a lot. I'm not normally a work 
horse, but I tend to try to ignore it totally. This 
incident with all the anthrax and all that, I don't 
even want to hear about that. It just started then. 
After that I returned back the third day. 

I knew -- I had hope, but I sensed that there 
was a lot of dead people. I didn't want to return. 
After the third day, then I went down there and I 
returned back to Ground Zero to an area called the 
hole. I guess my first approach in realizing what they 



16 
E. PEREZ 



were going through, the rescue phase of it. 

At the time I could see there was just -- I 
found out that there was a makeshift morgue and just 
being there for the first time and pulling out one 
body, I says, you know, I said I seen enough. At that 
time we went out on our own, because we was having 
problems with being used properly down in that area, as 
EMS employees . 

So we went on our own time and realized that 
-- tried to help as volunteers instead of being on a 
unit or assigned by staff. They would allow us to go 
down there and do what? Issue water, set up 
flashlights. Come on. There were better jobs to do. 
We tried to go down to rescue. We tried to help. At 
the time, I was devastated and I told my two partners, 
you know what, let's turn away from here because there 
is nothing we can do here. The greatest feeling of 
helplessness was there. Everything had to be done 
because they have to do the rescue and all that, but 
personally when I had that feeling of helplessness, 
that you can help nobody, the best thing is to 
retreat . 

After that third day I didn't want to return 
down there. Not even for all the money they wanted to 



17 
E. PEREZ 



pay me. They were giving 15 hour shifts. I didn't 
want to go back. 

Q. After the first collapse, you had your bus 
still on Barclay and West. Do you remember where you 
moved it to? 

A. I moved it back -- I moved it back to around 
Murray and West Street. After we moved it from there, 
that's when the second collapse came. I moved it back 
some more. After the second collapse we ran. As we 
were running in the second collapse, that's when I 
started directing people into Stuyvesant High School. 
Up West. Up West. 

Q. Okay. When you arrived on Barclay Street, 
you said that an officer told you to park there. Was 
it an EMS officer, fire officer? 

A. No, there was a highway police officer. 

Q. Highway? 

A. There was a highway police officer. That guy 
was unbelievable, how he handled that situation in that 
area. He alone saved a lot of lives, because the way 
he set that spot up. He was directing people. He told 
me listen, don't park over there, because I parked 
there and he said move it back. Give them some space, 
give them some space so we can get out, so I backed it 



18 



E. PEREZ 



up. We parked it, we parked it across, right on 
Barclay facing toward the building. I had to back in 
facing towards the building. 

You had to back in facing towards the 
building because I wanted the back of the vehicle to be 
open in case we had to treat the people and the 
equipment was out, so we had the back open. Back side 
facing towards the tower. 

Q. Do you remember when you first got there 
seeing any EMS officers around that -- 

A. The only officer that -- I was happy to see 
him, was Lieutenant Albuerme. He is from Harlem. Then 
he was like over there, I know him for years on the 
job, his daughter attended the same school that my 
daughter attended. Holy Cross. He is the first one I 
saw. 

Q. Okay, who was your partner that day? 

A. My partner that day was Delgado. 

Q. Do you know your vehicle number? 

A. Vehicle number was 138. 

Q. Okay. Any other EMS people around that you 
remember seeing? 

A. There was another Lieutenant along with 
Lieutenant Albuerme there, I just can't recall his 



19 
E. PEREZ 



name, but I have known him for quite sometime, because 
I have seen him on the job. He was there with me. As 
a matter of fact, after the first tower collapsed, we 
thought he was missing, because we could see him when 
he made the approach towards the initial tower had 
collapsed. We didn't see him after the clouds came 
back. I didn't see him thereafter. 

Then I think after the second collapse and 
everything was said and done, now we was trying to 
help, I guess, we had this instinct where we tried to 

-- I realize that we tried to find our men and the 
only thing I could think of was make sure my partner 
was okay and find out where the Lieutenants were at the 
time. 

Albuerme came back, we were able to -- I 
found him. The other Lieutenant was with him also, 
hugged each other and we couldn't believe. Then they 
started giving me directions on where to set up again. 
We were just trying to adhere to their demands as best 
we could . 

Q. Any other thoughts or comments you would like 
to add? 

A. Well, you know, what I have to say is that 
I'm very fortunate. Like I said when I got back, I am 



20 
E. PEREZ 



alive, so I must live. I survived through the twin 
towers collapse, so I'm fortunate. It wasn't my time. 
MR. RADENBERG: Okay, thank you. The time is 
now 0628 hours. The interview is concluded. 



File No. 9110177 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 



EMT FREDDY BURGOS 



Interview Date: October 31, 2001 



Transcribed by Elisabeth F. Nason 



F. BURGOS 
MR. RADENBERG: Today is October 31, 2001. 

The time is now 0719 hours. 

Q. I'm Paul Radenberg of the Fire Department of 
the City of New York conducting an interview with — 

A. Freddy Burgos, emergency medical technician 
for the Department of Fire. 

Q. Of EMS Battalion 14. This interview is being 
conducted at EMS Battalion 14 and is regarding the 
events of September 11, 2001. Freddy, just begin with 
when you were assigned to the job? 

A. We got assigned to the job. We were 
responding from the Bronx, down the FDR Highway. As we 
approached, we see the two burning buildings. 
Apparently both aircrafts had already crashed into the 
building. 

As we got downtown, we went through traffic 
to try and find the staging. We finally get to arrive 
at our staging area and we pull up. To my right I see 
one of the towers, I believe it's the first one that 
came down. In front of me on the other side of the 
street, there is numerous ambulances there. 

So I decided I didn't want to put myself 
right in the middle of it, so I backed my ambulance up 
to the opposite corner. Just then a rumble was heard, 



F. BURGOS 
and then after it goes black and pieces of metal and so 
forth and so forth started falling on the ambulance. 
It goes completely black. 

Thereafter, once it cleared up, I told my 
partner once it clears up we will get out, get the 
equipment and we will get out of the vehicle, because 
we were still in the vehicle. We were actually a 
little too close. That's where we wanted to go. When 
the first building came down, after the dust lifted 
from that one, in front of me, the other ambulances, 
most of them not Fire Department, private or some other 
ambulances, burning. I witnessed one vehicle crushed. 
I witnessed a limb inside the vehicle. There was 
obviously a person must have been dead inside it. The 
driver of the vehicle I believe it was. 

What else do I say. Me and my partner, Karen 
Lamanna, get out of the vehicle. We put our equipment 
on the stretcher. We come down walking, or actually 
running back to any open buildings, where we could go 
inside with our equipment. People were in there and 
set up a little triage area. Little bit of that 
stuff. Not much thereafter, prior to the second 
building coming down. 

Fire Department personnel and PD personnel 



F. BURGOS 
running into the building saying it's safe. Other 
people in there, including ourselves, were evacuated 
from that building and moved further away from the 
incident. As everybody was moving away, we are getting 
everybody. You could see obviously the body parts that 
were right next to us. 

My partner goes one way. I go back to the 
ambulance to pick up some more 02 tanks and just prior 
to getting to the bus, I hear the rumble and I drop 
everything and I run out. As I'm running, I take a 
look back, see the cloud of dust coming at me and I go 
into one of the buildings with a little walkway type of 
deal and ducked in there and see everything come by, it 
goes completely black. I waited a little bit before I 
came out. Come out and I'm walking to find Fire 
Department personnel. 

I started walking towards the water. I guess 
I figured if anything else came down, I'd go in the 
water. I walked alongside the water, until I wound up 
at one of the — West Street or Chambers, I'm not 
exacdy sure where it was. I walked over. I spoke to 
a Captain. I forget which Captain it was. I think it 
was Captain Rivera. He was looking at me and I'm all 
dusty and I'm white and so forth, and he says well, 



F. BURGOS 
where is your partner, I said I think she is dead. 

He takes me to the MERV, puts me in there and 
from then on I stood there. Not too long before I 
walked up to — caught a ride actually, up to the 
Chelsea Piers where everything was being stationed at. 
Before you knew it, that was the whole day. From there 
we got shipped back here. That was about it. 

Q. Okay. When you first got there, were you on 
the West Side Highway, West Street? 

A. I was right along the West Side Highway, 
parallel. 

Q. Somewhere around Liberty? 

A. Right. 

Q. Okay. When the building came, the first 
building came down, after you got your stuff out of the 
bus. 

A. My stuff was still in the bus. When the 
first building came down, we were in the bus when the 
first building came down. 

Q. After that, when you got out of the bus, 
okay, did you come across West Side Highway, did you 
head west, do you remember? 

A. I think I went down — these buildings along 
this side here. We got out of the bus and we came 



F. BURGOS 
down, down south into one of the buildings in there. 
That's where we set up our staging area. That lasted 
about 15 minutes, before somebody else came in and said 
it's not safe. We came back out and I went to my bus 
real quick to get more 02 tanks and everybody was going 
south. That's the last I saw of my partner, by the 
way. 

Q. She was heading south? 

A. If I remember correctiy, she was heading 
south on the West Side Highway. 

Q. Okay. 

A. I got caught up, because I went back to get 
more 02 tanks. 

Q. Do you remember any — when you first got 
there, any other EMS personnel that you recognized down 
there, officers? 

A. Not officers, I saw a couple of people that 
were there. I remember I saw Patterson, I forget his 
first name. 

Q. Patterson? 

A. One of the workers that was there got hit by 
something coming down and he hurt his arm. That I 
remember. Somewhere along the way, there was another 
EMT, I don't remember who he was. We helped him, he 



F. BURGOS 
helped us with all our shit. I don't know where his 
bus was. I don't think he did either. That was — the 
point we came down, when I came out of that building, 
after the second tower came down, I was alone here. 
By this time, when building number two came 
down, I was alone. I didn't know where anybody was. I 
commenced going before the second building came down 
and jumping into one of these buildings. I remember 
falling on my face a couple of times. I kept tripping 
over body parts. Like they were covered by dust, so I 
couldn't see where I was going. 

After that I came out and I started walking 
towards the water. I kept looking at the water because 
I kept saying to myself, if something else comes down, 
I'm going to jump in the water. 

Q. You could see the Hudson from where you were 
on the west side? 

A. I knew it was there. It was partially 
blocked, but I knew it was there. My wife works at 
World Financial Center. So I knew the water was 
there. From then on I met up with — as we were 
walking along the water, I met -- started to see 
people, bump into people. A couple I knew, a couple of 
people. Joey Conzo, that was it. Until I finally got 



F. BURGOS 
to the (inaudible) from. 

Q. Once you reached the Hudson, you went north 
towards Chambers? 

A. Started walking up towards Chambers where 
— somebody said something about Chambers as far as 
West Street, or whatever that street was, as far as the 
first safety area. So that's basically where I kept 
heading, along the water. Basically kept heading that 
up that way; rubble, mess, shit like that, body parts 
everywhere. 

Q. Yes, yes. 

A. (inaudible). 

Q. Do you remember offhand what vehicle you were 
in, the vehicle number that day? 

A. I think it was 448, but I can't be sure. 

Q. What was your partner's name? 

A. Karen Lamanna. She was ALS. I was working 
overtime that day. I wasn't even supposed to be 
working. I was off that day. I came in for overtime 
and that was my first job. 

Q. Okay. 

A. (inaudible). 

Q. Okay. Any thoughts or comments? 

A. We were too close, we were too fucking 



F. BURGOS 
close. It wasn't just EMS. It was the entire system. 
Too close. That's about my only opinion that, too damn 
close. 

MR. RADENBERG: Okay, the time is now 0731. 
The interview is concluded. The interview date 
was October 31, 2001, not as previously stated 
August 31, 2001. 



File No. 9110180 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

EMT FAROOQ MUHAMMAD 

Interview Date: November 1, 2001 



Transcribed by Nancy Francis 



F. MUHAMMAD 

LIEUTENANT FEILER: Today's date is November 
1st, 2001. The time now is 1035 hours, and this is 
Monty Feiler of the New York City Fire Department, 
World Trade Center Task Force. I'm conducting an 
interview with the following individual: 

Q. Please state your name, rank, title and 
assigned command. 

A. My name is Farooq Muhammad. I'm an EMT. 
Presently I'm on light duty at BHS. I normally work at 
Battalion 58. 

Q. Of the New York City Fire Department. We're 
conducting the interview at the BITS office regarding 
the events of September 11th, 2001. Could you go 
ahead, beginning with when you first became aware of 
the incident? 

A. Well, I was going about my normal daily 
routine. I was driving along to work. I was actually 
driving along Flatbush Avenue, and what I saw was a lot 
of smoke coming from the direction of lower Manhattan. 
I didn't know what it was. I just saw that people were 
actually looking at it . I thought some building was on 
fire. I didn't know exactly what it was. Eventually, 
I made it to this parking lot where I sometimes park 
the car if I do bring my car, and I went inside and 



F. MUHAMMAD 

these two gentlemen are talking and they're saying how 
terrible it is about what just happened. I go what 
happened? And they tell me that two planes went into 
the World Trade Center and I was shocked. 

So what I did was I just left my car there 
and I ran across the street into the Fire Department 
Headquarters, where I work presently, and I looked at 
the TV in the waiting room for BHS, and I see that two 
planes had struck the World Trade Center. I was 
shocked, dismayed. My first reaction was to get there 
or to speak to somebody who was going there, see what 
the deal is. I knew I was on light duty, but I wasn't 
really concerned about that. I just wanted to get over 
there. 

So what happened was I tried to find Captain 
Jay Swithers, who was my supervisor, and I found that 
he had already gone. He wasn't there. So I couldn't 
ask him and there wasn't anybody really to ask. So 
what I did was I teamed up with a few other EMS 
members. They were actually all paramedics. I 
remember the names of William Tier, a paramedic by the 
name of Bonnie, another one by the name of Roque 
Torres, another gentleman, I forget his name offhand. 
We decided to go together. We just left the building 



F. MUHAMMAD 



and we started looking for an ambulance. We just 
basically flagged an ambulance and it happened to be a 
private ambulance. I don't even remember the name. I 
think it might have been Associate. But we flagged 
them down, they stopped for us, we jumped on and we 
went over the Brooklyn Bridge and we ended up in that 
part of town, lower Manhattan, where the incident 
occurred. But we weren't right in front of the 
buildings yet. 

What happened was we met up with some other 
EMS people and we started to decide how we were going 
to work the situation. There was just pandemonium 
there. People were running around, people didn't know 
where to go, people were shocked, people were just 
frantic. Eventually, an EMS lieutenant said that we 
should -- I guess they set up triage across from the 
towers. 

Q. Do you know which lieutenant it was? 

A. I forget her name offhand. 

Q. Okay. 

A. It was the first time I ever saw her. 

So we said fine and we together -- we decided 
we weren't going to split up. This was the initial 
thing, we weren't going to split up, and these are the 



F. MUHAMMAD 

paramedics that I went with. We told each other let's 
stick together. So together we went in front of the 
tower and we found that there were other EMS members 
there that had already set up triage and they were 
triaging people who had asthma attacks, burns and stuff 
like that. I saw Captain Jay Swithers there, I saw 
Manny Delgado, I saw Lieutenant Bruce Medjuck there 
and -- actually, prior to even going there, I did see 
Ricardo Quinn. I did run into him and speak to him 
briefly. 

Q. Where did you see him? 

A. This is somewhere in that part of lower 
Manhattan, around there, somewhere around Broadway or 
something like that, somewhere in that area. I don't 
know exactly which street it was, but I did speak to 
him briefly. He had come in, from what I remember, an 
ambulance with somebody else, and after that I didn't 
see him again. 

Anyway, we ended up in front of the tower and 
we were triaging people. We were giving them oxygen, 
giving them nebulizers. We had made a plan. There 
were ambulances out in front. We decided we were going 
to start transporting people, this is what we were 
going to do, and before you knew it, we heard a loud 



F. MUHAMMAD 

noise, you looked up, and the tower was collapsing. So 
we started to actually run for our lives. The debris 
caught up with us. We couldn't see, we couldn't 
breathe. It was just horrible. I was actually 
suffocating. I thought I was going to pass out and 
die. I mean, at first I thought something was going to 
hit me because there was debris that was coming. There 
was just stuff falling everywhere. I covered myself. 

Actually, while I was running, I fell because 
there were so many people running and I got trampled a 
little bit, but I got back up and started running 
again, and then all of a sudden I just couldn't run 
because I was suffocating so bad, I couldn't breathe, I 
couldn't see, and all I thought was, oh, no, here I am 
going to die now because I can't breathe, I can't see 
anything. So I started screaming a little bit, as much 
as I could. I decided to see if - - I was like is 
anybody here, anybody around me? All I heard was keep 
running, keep running. I heard a voice. So I just 
kept running. 

Eventually I made it to -- well, actually, 
before the debris came, while the building was still 
collapsing, I was actually telling people to run 
because there were people who were frozen, like 



F. MUHAMMAD 

civilians, people that were just frozen. They weren't 
moving, women. I remember mostly women standing there 
and not running and I was telling them run, run, run, 
you know, because they were like frozen. They wouldn't 
move. I guess I encouraged some of them to run because 
I made eye contact with some of the people and I 
started yelling at them to run. 

So we started to run, and when I looked back, 
I actually saw the cloud coming, and so you couldn't 
outrun the cloud. It was just coming so fast and it 
was like, oh, no, here it comes, and then whoosh, it 
just passed us, and this was where it was like darkness 
and it was like breathing in like thick, thick dirt. 
That's all it was. It was just like every breath you 
took, it was like you were just suffocating because it 
wasn't oxygen, it wasn't air. 

But after falling and getting up again and 
then just having the will to just keep running, that's 
what I did. I ran and luckily somewhere this door 
opened up. I didn't even know what it was. I ran 
inside. It happened to be a store. It was some kind 
of like fabric store because I saw a lot of like fabric 
stacked up while I was downstairs in the basement. 
There was a police officer down there. Somebody from 



F. MUHAMMAD 

the Buildings Department was down there. I actually 
think I might have his name because later on I took his 
card. One second. 

Yes. His name was Michael Carbone. He was 
down there, one police officer, another law enforcement 
officer, I don't remember his name, but he did have a 
firearm and a shield on, but he was in a suit. What we 
did, there was some water down there, so we were like 
clearing our throats. There was like thick stuff 
coming up. For a good ten minutes all we were doing, 
we were just coughing and trying to breathe. But a lot 
of debris was coming downstairs into there also. 

But after I regained myself a little bit, I 
spoke to this gentleman, Mr. Carbone, and the other law 
enforcement person, and I said I want to get back out 
there, see if I can help people, and they agreed. They 
were like let's see what we could do. So the three of 
us got together and we went back outside, and when we 
were outside, it was just so thick still, the debris. 
It was like so thick. We were right close to the tower 
that in that area the debris was so thick that after 
running a little bit, we decided to go into this other 
building that was some kind of like not-for-profit 
organization. I don't even know the name. 



F. MUHAMMAD 

We go in there and, once again, there we are 
coughing and trying to get water, and we had some 
people that were there. We started washing them off, 
helping them to clean themselves off. There was a 
woman down there who had broke her leg. We carried her 
downstairs and put her in a comfortable chair because 
she was very frantic. She was screaming. We told her 
to calm down because we didn't want her to excite the 
other people that were coming in. So we took her 
downstairs, we propped her leg up, made her 
comfortable, told her to relax, calmed her down. 
Q. Do you know her name? 

A. No, I didn't know her name. None of the 
phones were working. We tried to call our loved ones. 
I have loved ones in Manhattan who worked on Liberty. 
I have a loved one who worked on Liberty and Broadway, 
another brother who was in midtown Manhattan. I 
couldn't reach anyone. I didn't know if they were okay 
or not. But luckily, thank God, I found out later on 
they made it out okay. 

So while we were in this place, we were 
helping people clean themselves off. People were 
coming in like totally covered. You couldn't even tell 
what color they were, if they were black or white, 



10 

F. MUHAMMAD 



because they were all covered in this debris. 
Everybody was like one color. Then they couldn't 
breathe. It was in their ears, eyes, and we were 
cleaning them off, and the stuff was like burning. It 
was like burning your skin. The stuff was really bad. 

What we decide to do then was to get out of 
this building now and try to go back outside and help 
people. So what we did was we got these garbage bags 
and a bunch of these people that ran into the building 
that we were in gave us a bunch of wet rags -- I mean 
gave us a bunch rags that we wet. We asked for rags; 
do you have any rags? They found some rags and they 
gave us the rags and we soaked them, we put them in 
garbage bags, and we got a bunch of bottled water and 
we put those in bags and we were going to go outside. 

But right before we were going to go outside, 
the next big, loud noise comes and here comes another 
big, thick cloud of debris. So it's like we opened the 
door and we see the debris coming and now people were 
running and we were like trying to let as many people 
in as we can. We're like okay, come on, get in, get 
in, and before you knew it, we had to shut the door 
because otherwise the whole place was going to be 
filled with it. So we shut the door, and at one point, 



11 

F. MUHAMMAD 



you could see through the windows, and when the debris 
came, it was pitch darkness again. It was like you 
couldn't see anything outside. You didn't know what 
was going on with the people. 

After that cleared a little bit, we let more 
people in and we helped clean them off, and then we 
finally went outside. I grabbed the bottles of water, 
and Mr. Michael Carbone from the Department of 
Buildings, he and the other gentleman, they grabbed the 
rags and we went outside and we started giving rags to 
people and bottles of water to people, like here. 
Everybody was like more than willing to take it. They 
really needed it. People were covered in the stuff, 
they couldn't breathe, they wanted to clear their 
throats. So we were giving it out. 

I walked one block and then I saw -- I didn't 
see any EMS people at this time. We were outside. I 
don't see any EMS people. I see police officers but no 
EMS people. But then after walking a couple blocks, 
after like ten minutes, I see Captain Jay Swithers and 
I was so happy to see him. I ran up to him, I gave him 
a hug, I'm like I'm glad to see that you're okay 
because we were like so close to the tower that I was 
sure that a lot of people got hurt or lost. He told me 



12 
F. MUHAMMAD 



that he was over there, he ducked under a truck 
somewhere eventually and that he was okay and I was 
happy to hear that. I told these gentlemen that I'm 
going to stay with him and they decided to move on. 

So me and Captain Swithers, we started to 
just try to figure out what we're going to do. We 
started walking around. In the meantime, I was giving 
everybody water. I had cups also that I took because I 
knew that eventually the water was going to run low, so 
I wouldn't give people bottles, I'd put it in cups, and 
that's what I was doing. When the water was running 
low, I started putting it in cups, giving it to 
people. People were running over to us and asking us 
where do we go? What do we do? All we could tell them 
was go to the Brooklyn Bridge, go over the bridge and 
go to Brooklyn, you know, just stay away from that 
area, just go towards the bridge and try to go to 
Brooklyn, try to get out of Manhattan. That's all we 
could tell them. We didn't have any other advice to 
really give them. 

Finally, we kept walking. We made it towards 
South Street Seaport area and we started walking along 
that and we were like trying to figure out where to go, 
and we were both like concerned. We didn't know if the 



13 
F. MUHAMMAD 



next building was going to come down, there was another 
bomb, you know, it's like one of those tense feelings, 
it's like a war zone. There was the thick debris, it 
was like three inches on the ground all over the 
place. It was like walking in the snow. People were 
covered in this, people who had no shoes, people's 
clothes were ripped. It's just a horrible scene. 

Anyway, a whole group of police officers were 
walking by and we asked them, do you know if anything 
is going on, any kind of like treatment area? They 
said, well, we hear there's something going on at South 
Street Seaport, South Street ferry area, Staten Island 
Ferry. So we walked over there. We kept walking and 
walking, and when we got there, we saw that they 
started setting up some type of triage and we helped 
set that up. There were IV lines and all kinds of 
equipment set up in the lobby of that area. Just then 
a whole like large group of firemen arrived from Staten 
Island and everybody was cheering them and they went 
about their business. 

So I remained there doing triage, but Captain 
Swithers, he eventually left because he was part of the 
USAR team, Urban Search and Rescue, so he had to go do 
that. So I stayed there and I helped treat a lot of 



14 
F. MUHAMMAD 



people who had lacerations, they had sprained ankles 
and stuff like that, and I helped put them in the stair 
chair. I helped wrap them up, treat them, put them in 
the stair chair and wheel them to the ambulances and 
put them in the ambulances and the ambulances took 
them. I didn't do any kind of ambulance driving or 
anything like that. I remained at the South Street 
ferry. 

Q. Do you know who was supervising that area? 

A. Chief... 

It's on the tip of my tongue. I forget his 
name offhand . 

Q. Were there any other EMS people there that 
you recognized that you may have come across? 

A. Timothy, a gentleman by the name of Timothy, 
who was at BHS also. That was his first day full duty 
again. I saw George Gatt, EMT. There were some 
Metropolitan people there also. I forget their names 
offhand. Bruce Medjuck was also there at the time. He 
ended up there. So did Manny Delgado. One of the 
people in the ambulances for doing transport. 

Q. There was a Fire Department car there, too. 

A. Idris Bey. I eventually saw Idris Bey. 

Q. Who is that? 



15 
F. MUHAMMAD 



A. He's an EMT for the Fire Department. 

Q. How do you spell that? 

A. B-e-y is the last name. I-d-r-i-s. We sort 
of gave each other a big hug and everything because 
he's actually a black Muslim and I happen to be a 
Muslim and we both like were just shocked at this 
because why would anybody do this in the name of any 
religion, you know what I mean? Just a horrible thing 
that people were actually looking at Islam as the 
enemy, not just those people who did that. So it was 
good to see him and actually just talk about it for 
like a good five minutes, just reminding ourselves that 
there's no way that we could ever accept anything like 
this as being Islamic, you know, ever, because we know 
from the Koran that this is an evil thing and Islam 
never teaches this. 

Also, I had another EMT friend there, Stephen 
Valladares. Joan Hillgardner was there. Hillgardner. 
She was there. She's part of the union. She was just 
doing a lot of good work there, she was doing a lot of 
triage, she was giving a lot of people emotional 
support. Just a whole slew of EMS people there. We 
were treating a lot of firemen. It was just a very 
emotional thing. Eventually it started catching up 



16 
F. MUHAMMAD 



with you, what's going on. So we did a lot of treating 
there. A lot of firemen came in with eye injuries and 
sprains and strains. We had cots and everything set up 
and we were treating them. 

It was hard. We were running out of masks, 
nobody had any face masks, so everybody just kept 
breathing that stuff in because nobody had even the 
disposable type masks. We really needed the heavy-duty 
ones, but we didn't even have the disposable ones. 
Ambulances were like completely finished. Nobody had 
any. It was like people who were part of hospitals 
eventually would come by and say, look, you need 
masks? I have a few. It was like that. It was like 
we had no masks. It was just terrible. 

Q. Is there anything else that you want to add 
before we conclude, anything that you think is 
important, that you want to reiterate? 

A. Well, I'd like to reiterate the fact that, as 
a Muslim who works for the Fire Department, that I can 
say that, as far as my family is concerned, as far as 
my friends who happen to be Muslims are concerned, that 
this is no way, you know, this no way reflects Islam. 
Islam does not teach this. Islam is a religion of 
peace and it teaches brotherhood amongst all people and 



17 
F. MUHAMMAD 



races. Regardless of what religion they are, you're 
supposed to treat them with respect, just like you 
would treat your own mother or father with respect. 
What you would want for yourself, that's how you treat 
them. 

I think not only was this an attack on the 
United States, but the people who did this also 
attacked Islam because now here you are with millions 
of people in the world thinking that Islam is something 
that's of violence, when really it isn't, when really 
it's these people who chose it as a means to get their 
-- whatever they did, you know, to get that done, not 
to actually portray the true Islam. It's just 
something that they tried to use to manipulate. That's 
what a lot of people do, unfortunately, and a lot of 
people out there who claim to be Muslims do manipulate 
people into thinking that killing innocent people is 
good when Islam clearly teaches you that it's something 
that's not tolerated by God and never will be and it 
shouldn't be tolerated by any Muslim. 

So I'd like to let people know that, 
hopefully, I just hope that people could realize that. 
People could just do some research on their own instead 
of just listening to somebody who says that, oh, no, 



18 
F. MUHAMMAD 



Islam teaches hatred or violence. Hopefully, they 
could research on their own and find that, no, it's the 
opposite. It teaches peace and love for all humanity, 
whether they're Jewish or Christian or Buddha or 
whatever, rich or poor, men, women or children. It 
actually teaches respect for the most vulnerable, for 
the weakest, poorest people. You treat them equal, as 
you would anyone. There's no like you're better than 
me or I'm better than you because I'm Muslim. It just 
doesn't work that way. 

It just hurts me that this happened, just 
like a slap in the face, that's how I see it. For 
good-hearted Muslims who follow the true message all 
over the world, I feel this is like a slap in the face, 
and as an American, I hope that as a nation we could 
conquer this terrorism, I really do hope that, because 
my family came here many, many years ago for a better 
life, to live the American dream. I was born here, 
raised here. I'm an American citizen. This is my 
home. I plan on keeping this as my home for as long as 
I live. I mean, I'm an American. Where am I going to 
go? This is my home. I truly hope that together 
Americans can overcome this and that peace could be a 
part of our daily lives instead of having to worry 



19 
F. MUHAMMAD 



about getting on the train or traveling or driving in 
your car worrying about some kind of terrorist attack, 
or opening your mail, worrying about getting sick. 

LIEUTENANT FEILER: Okay. On behalf of the 
Fire Department, I want to thank you for participating 
in this. Can I just get the time, please? 

A VOICE: 11:00. 

LIEUTENANT FEILER: We'll conclude the 
interview at 11:00 o'clock. Thank you. 



File No. 9110181 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

EMT PAUL ADAMS 

Interview Date: November 1, 2001 



Transcribed by Nancy Francis 



P. ADAMS 

LIEUTENANT RADENBERG: Today is November 1st, 
2001. I'm Paul Radenberg of the Fire Department, City 
of New York. The time is now 0647 hours and I'm 
conducting an interview with. . . 

EMT PAUL ADAMS: Paul Adams, Battalion 49, 
Shield No. 2212. 

LIEUTENANT RADENBERG: We're currently at EMS 
Battalion 49. This interview is regarding the events 
of September 11th, 2001. 

Q. Paul, if you could start with when you were 
assigned to the job. 

A. Yes. That morning we got the job at 
approximately 9:00 o'clock in the morning from Elmhurst 
Hospital. We came down Queens Boulevard. We saw one 
of the towers had been hit, engulfed in smoke. We got 
across the Midtown Tunnel. We went in the tunnel, came 
out. We came down Second Avenue south, got over to 
Broadway. We got to the site at 9:15 at Church and 
Vesey Street, where we parked the vehicle. We walked 
down to Fulton and Church where they had a triage set 
up in front of the Millenium Hotel. At that time the 
second plane had just hit, just prior to our arrival. 

We were asked if we had our triage tags by 
our Captain. At this time I just turned around. 



P. ADAMS 

People were walking out of the buildings. We grabbed 
one patient who we found out later had 70 percent burns 
on her body, second and third degree burns. We took 
her, a couple other people, and shot out of there, went 
up -- I can't remember the street we went up, but I 
ended up going to -- it was the wrong way facing 
Broadway in front of St. Vincent's. Me and my partner, 
we got her out with some other people. 

Then we went back in, back to the site, back 
to the same area, the triage, and about five minutes 
later, we looked up, we were screaming, I looked up, I 
see one of the buildings coming down. I ran about 30 
feet. I found out later on I went up against -- I 
tripped over a fire hose. I lost sight of my partner, 
Mous Diaz. I got up and went up against what I found 
out now is the Millenium Hotel's parking lot garage 
gate. It was closed. It had like a foot overhang. 

I was with this FBI agent and I put my helmet 
over my face and just stood against the gate and took a 
quick look and here comes the debris from all the 
building. It lasted for about ten minutes. I couldn't 
breathe. My lungs were filling up with this stuff. I 
don't know what it was. I thought I was going to die, 
either the building debris was going to hit me or the 



P. ADAMS 

building I was under was going to collapse or my lungs 
were going to collapse. I was hyperventilating. I 
just thought to myself I've got to slow my breathing 
down. I did that and that's the only thing that saved 
me . 

About close to ten minutes later, the dust 
starts dissipating. I grabbed the FBI agent and I 
started another vehicle that was like 20 feet away. I 
put him in it. I said I'll be back in a minute, went 
around, got six, seven, eight other people, put them in 
the truck, and then I went back to the site looking for 
my partner, Mous . I looked around for a couple 
minutes. I didn't hear nothing, no reaction. So I 
shot out of there. I had the windshield wipers on for 
about four, five blocks. It was still cloudy out, 
dust . 

I dropped these patients off at St. Vincent's 
and then went back in. In the process of going back 
in, No. 2 came down, and by the time I got, there they 
had already completely, totally -- you know, it was 
collapsed. I just went back in, got like another six, 
seven, eight people out. I had them in the front seat 
of the vehicle. I had one guy riding on the hood of 
the truck. I got them to St. Vincent's, dumped them 



P. ADAMS 

out there. I know it's a shitty word to use, but 
that's just what it was, just get them in and get them 
out. I didn't take no names or nothing, except for the 
original, first one, the burn patient. There was just 
no time to be filling out paperwork or anything else. 

I went back in again afterwards, looking for 
my partner, looking for Carlos Lillo, and he's gone 
now. I found my partner about four, five hours later, 
and I went over to where they had another triage area 
on West Side Highway and I believe it was Vesey, by the 
pedestrian bridge. I was checked out in the ambulance 
over there and I was fine, came back out, and about 
five hours later I went to Mount Sinai Hospital, where 
they kept me for like four hours, did tests. I had 
bruises on my knees, my shoulder was hurt, killing me, 
constant cough, and that's it. 

Q. When you first got there, you parked your 
vehicle up on -- 

A. Vesey. 

Q. On Church and Vesey? 

A. Yes. 

Q. It was at that point, roughly, that the 
second tower got hit, right as you pulled up initially? 

A. Which are you talking about; the first one? 



P. ADAMS 

Q. Yes. When you first got to the scene. 

A. The second tower got hit, I learned, I 
believe, as we were under the Midtown Tunnel. 

Q. Oh, okay. All right. 

A. It was about 9:11 or something, 9:12, the 
second one, the second plane hit? 

Q. Okay. When you got over here into Church and 
Vesey and Fulton, any other EMS units over there? 

A. Yes. We had the medics. They followed us. 
I forgot to mention that. They followed us from 
Elmhurst Hospital. We got the jobs together and we 
both went. 

Q. 49 Victor? 

A. 49 Victor, yes. 

Q. Okay. 

A. Carlos Lillo, who's now gone. We both 
followed each other in all the way through from 
Elmhurst right into downtown. When we got off at Vesey 
and Church, we parked the vehicles right there. As far 
as other vehicles at the time? I think there was like 
a private ambulance company there, numerous fire 
trucks. I really didn't see any other people. 

Q. Any EMS officers around that you recognized 
in the area? 



P. ADAMS 

A. Yes. There was a Captain over there. There 
was Bruce Medjuck. He was there. He's a nice guy, 
good people. 

Q. Do you remember the Captain's name? 



A. 



Q. Okay. 

A. Her first words out of her mouth were where 's 
your triage tags? Where's your triage tags? There 
were people walking around with their green tags on and 
I just looked at her and I said are you kidding me? I 
said these people should be just getting out of here. 
Get out of the site. The buildings didn't come down 
yet, but it was still debris and everything else coming 
down in the area from the plane and fuel. So we just 
grabbed our first patient. 

Q. The burn patient? 

A. The burn patient, right. That was the first 
one that we grabbed with her friend that walked down 
the 83, 84 flights. I feel they're going to find a lot 
of people with triage tags on with greens on them that 
because of so-called people following protocol that was 
basically made for, I think, just like a regular plane 
crash somewhere in a field, somewhere in the ocean. 



P. ADAMS 

But I don't know. Like I said, you're going to find a 
lot of people dead with green triage tags around their 
neck . 

Q. After you got the burn patient to St. 
Vincent's, do you remember what route you came back to 
the scene on? 

A. Yes. Broadway. 

Q. You came down Broadway? 

A. Shot down Broadway, yes, down regular 
Broadway. 

Q. Do you remember where you came west back into 
the site? 

A. Yes. I'm not sure exactly. I did some 
fenagling to get -- you know, I like went up one block 
and down another just to get back to the same site 
again . 

Q. Back to Fulton and Church? 

A. Yes. 

Q. That's when the first building came down? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Right as you got back down there? 

A. About five minutes later, when we started 
treating some other people. There was one person that 
sounded like she was having an MI because she had 



P. ADAMS 

walked -- it was an elderly woman. She had walked down 
80 some flights also. We had just put her on the 
stretcher, actually, and that's when people looked up 
and started screaming and we looked up and that's when 
the first one came down. We pulled the stretcher as 
far as we could with her on it, you know, get her out 
of the way. Then we found out later, though, that she 
was all right. She got up out of the stretcher also. 
She seen God, I guess, seen the light. 

Q. So after the first collapse, you took another 
load of patients up to St. Vincent's? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Did you come back the same way, down Broadway 
again? 

A. The same way again, yes. I was stopped by a 
Chief. I forgot to mention that, too. But he asked me 
to -- this is the third time I'm going in. The second 
one I just came down. He asked me to pull over to the 
side. He was setting up triage. It was like five 
blocks away. He had three ambulances at the side. I 
said how many patients you got? He goes one. So I 
kind of cursed him out, and I said what, are you nuts, 
and I just drove right back in. 

Q. Do you remember where on Broadway that was? 



10 
P. ADAMS 



A. No. I have no idea. 

Q. Do you remember who the Chief was? 

A. Some young guy. I'm not sure. 

Q. When you got over to West and Vesey, any idea 
what time that was? That was after the second -- 

A. Yes. That was about an hour after that 
because I was looking around for my partners. 

Q. About an hour after the second tower came 
down? 

A. Yes. Then I was just physically exhausted 
and I had problems seeing, coughing, my knees were 
killing me. 

Q. Okay. Anything else you'd like to add? 

A. No. I've pretty much said everything. Thank 
you . 

LIEUTENANT RADENBERG: Thank you. The time 
is now 0659 hours and the interview is concluded. 



File No. 9110183 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMT ORLANDO MARTINEZ 
Interview Date: November 1, 2001 



Transcribed by Elisabeth F. Nason 



0. MARTINEZ 



MR. DUN: Today is November 1, 2001. The 

time is 740 hours. My name is Richard Dun from 

the New York City Fire Department. 

Q. Working with? 

A. Fabiola Quevedo from the New York City Fire 
Department . 

Q. We are conducting an interview with? 

A. EMT Orlando Martinez, Battalion 4. 

Q. Shield? 

A. 2815 shield number. 

Q. In your own words, can you describe the 
events leading up to the events of September 11, 2001? 

A. Early morning, about 8:40, I was parked down 
at Church and Barclay, regular normal routine, getting 
our breakfast. While inside the deli a few minutes 
later, there was a large explosion. We went outside, 
the building shook we were in, looked up and we saw the 
top half of the World Trade Center on fire. 

My partner ran to the vehicle with me and as 
we were running he called over the air for an explosion 
at the World Trade Center. I'm not sure if it was the 
first transmission, but it was 30 seconds afterwards. 
We were a block away. 

Q. What was your unit designation? 



0. MARTINEZ 

A. Unit 01 Adam. 

Q. Tour 2? 

A. Yes, that's our regular unit. We got in the 
vehicle. We drove one block to Church and Vesey in 
front of World Trade Center 5, in between 5 and 4, 
right on the corner. We opened the doors up. As soon 
as we opened the doors up we got overwhelmed by 
patients just coming over to us for help. People were 
bleeding, tripping, minor injuries, some major, we had 
some second degree burns run up to us initially. 

We continued to call for back up. About 4 or 
5 minutes later, we finally got the first back up; that 
was the medics. 

Q. When you first pulled up was there a lot of 
debris on the ground, what was the scene like? 

A. No, no debris. Not where we were at. We 
were parked on Church and Vesey. Later on there was a 
lot of debris, but most of the debris was, I think 
inside the courtyard of the World Trade Center, not so 
much on Church and Vesey, not yet anyway. 

Q. Was there a lot of chaos and panic at the 
time? 

A. Oh, yes. 

Q. People were running -- 



0. MARTINEZ 

A. Well, they were running towards us, asking us 
for help, asking us for help, asking us where to go. A 
police officer came up to us in plain clothes and told 
patients in the ambulance -- we were packing the 
ambulance, we couldn't kick anybody out. Usually we 
have a triage outside sitting on the sidewalk. We just 
couldn't stop everybody. He told people in the 
ambulance it was a plane accident. It's not a 
terrorist attack. Once he said that, a few minutes 
later the second plane hit. 

After that everybody -- they didn't believe 
him any more. Some people jumped out of the ambulance, 
some stood inside. Once the second plane hit, the 
shrapnel from either the plane or the building started 
hitting the top of the bus and the area around us. 
Anybody who was near the ambulance ran inside the 
ambulance and ducked for cover. 

We closed the doors. People inside the 
ambulance were screaming. We were trying to calm them 
down, telling them to relax, including my partner. 

Q. What was his name? 

A. EMT Frank Puma. 

He was calm though. For the most part. We 
did our best. About a minute later I told Frank we 



0. MARTINEZ 

have to get out of here. It's not safe to be on this 
corner. So I jumped out of the back, went to the 
drivers seat and put the vehicle in reverse and went 
forward down Vesey Street towards Beekman Hospital. 

We had a second degree burn patient with 
respiratory problems, so we needed to get him out of 
there. For our safety and to just transport at least, 
the busload of patients. 

Q. At this time, both buildings were still 
standing? 

A. Oh, yes. Once we started taking off, I guess 
30 feet in front of us, there was a lady on the ground 
by the curb and she was just waving her arms. That's 
all she could wave. Her legs were crushed. Apparently 
she got hit by part of the landing gear, one of the 
tires of the airplane. There was a large tire next to 
her . 

The person who was next to her, I guess 
worked with her, said something hit her. It may have 
been the landing gear. It was a large piece of metal 
that was so sharp it slit her whole back open, 
buttocks. Her legs were exposed, bones. I told Frank, 
jump out of the back of the bus, get the stretcher. So 
we took the second degree burn patient out of the 



0. MARTINEZ 

stretcher, threw him on the bench. We placed him on 
the bench. We took the stretcher out, took the long 
board . 

Q. In your words. 

A. Yes. We boarded her as fast as we could. 
There was nowhere to grab her. She was too slippery, 
so I grabbed the hip bone. That was exposed. We just 
kind of picked her up, put her on the long board and we 
strapped her up, put her on the stretcher and took as 
much flesh as we could. It was just hanging all over 
the place, put it between her legs. Put her in the 
ambulance and rushed her to Beekman. 

From there we dropped off the first seven or 
eight patients. Came out the ER after we dropped 
everybody off. Actually we dropped the first patient 
off, the lady with the -- that got hit with the landing 
gear. When we got back to the ambulance a minute 
later, it was empty, so I guess the doctors outside 
took everybody out of the ambulance. I don't know what 
happened . 

Went back to the ambulance, there were 
purses, wallets, people's personal belongings in the 
back of the ambulance. I grabbed everything I could, 
go into the ER, dropped it off, told the nurses here's 



0. MARTINEZ 

everybody's belongings. I guess they sorted it out. 

We cleaned as much as we could, whatever we 
could on the long board, not the long board, the 
stretcher. So we just wiped it down. No sheet. Went 
back over there. Went back to -- we tried to go back 
to Church and Vesey, we knew there were a lot of people 
there, but we saw most of the ambulances going up, I 
believe it was Barclay Street toward West, there was a 
new staging area. 

Dispatch said to go to the staging area, so 
we rediverted to the staging area. 

Q. Buildings are still standing? 
A. Still standing, yes. Very swift, still 
within half an hour, we had to be out there. We 
started going towards the staging area. We got flagged 
down by Hatzolahs. They had critical patients by the 
Church, so we rediverted one block and we treated a few 
more people injured there. Hatzolah had three busses, 
so we let them take care of them. They transported and 
we went back to the staging area. 

We never made it there the first time. We 
attempted the second time. We got there. We parked on 
Vesey and North End, with all the other ambulances. 
Once we parked there, they told us stay by the bus and 



0. MARTINEZ 

wait for further instructions. We stayed by the bus 
and waited, and I realized that we had almost nothing 
left in the ambulance. We depleted most of our 
resources. 

I told Frank stay with the bus. I have to go 
to the LSI), Allan Cruz. It was half a block away. I 
said I will be back, don't worry. He goes all right. 
I went over to the LSU, got some water and some more 
supplies, restocked the ambulance. After I got all the 
supplies I started walking back towards the ambulance 
and dispatch on the radio goes everybody run north, the 
building is leaning. So I started running towards the 
bus. I didn't see him. I said maybe he left already. 

So I ran this way towards Stuyvesant High 
School on the right. I went up Vesey, I made a right 
towards Stuyvesant High School. My partner Frank went 
to the left towards the water. He's a good swimmer. 
I 'm not . 

They said some people jumped into the water. 
I'm not sure they did. Anyway, I ran to the right. He 
ran to the left. After that I didn't see him for two 
hours after that, maybe an hour and a half. I presumed 
he didn't make it out of there. He presumed I didn't 
make it out of there. 



0. MARTINEZ 

Q. This is the first building collapsing? 

A. Right. There was an explosion and after we 
started running, I was able to make it to Chambers and 
West, where I only saw one EMT, EMT Vega. She is new 
here. She was the only EMT I saw from the station and 
with all the cops and everybody else running, rescue 
workers. I grabbed her and I said just stay with me. 
We will try to get out of here. 

So we made it to Chambers and West, which is 
about 4 blocks from Vesey. We stopped, looked up, 
waited a few seconds for further instructions. The new 
staging area was Chambers and West Street at that 
time. We waited there I guess about 10, 15 minutes. 
That's when we heard the building collapse. That's 
when they told us to run again. 

We ran again, up north, as fast as we could. 
We made it to the -- I made it to the St. Vincent's 
garage, I think it's on Vestry. I ran two marathons in 
New York. When you got to run, you run. 

Q. (inaudible) . 

A. Yes, it is. We made it up there. Waited for 
further instructions. Nobody knew what was going on, 
nobody knew where to go. They told everybody stay out 
of the World Trade Center area. Don't go back in. 



10 

0. MARTINEZ 



It's not safe. So I was looking for my partner about 
an hour and a half. I still couldn't find him. I 
presumed he was missing. He presumed I was missing. 
An hour and a half later an ambulance comes full of 
soot. It's all covered in white and he is in the 
driver's seat. 

Q. Was that your vehicle? 

A. My vehicle, my partner made it out. I don't 
know how he did it, but he did. He was able to get 
out. He had one EMT on the right-hand side on the 
passenger side of the ambulance, D'Angelis. He was 
off, he just came out of his shift, midnight, and I 
guess jumped in the truck and he came down to help. 

Q. Who was that? 

A. Actually he came down in his personal vehicle 
to the World Trade Center. D'Angelis. I forgot his 
first name. He came in his personal vehicle. He drove 
to the World Trade Center, parked it by the World Trade 
and started helping out and he met Frank Puma there. 
They both jumped in the vehicle and they drove up West 
Street. I met Frank by the St. Vincent's garage. 

After that we stood there for about, I guess 
another half hour, 40 minutes. Time is a little flaky, 
man. I can't really remember too much. Everything 



11 

0. MARTINEZ 



seemed like it went so fast. I guess half an hour. We 
all convened, we all got together. We met everybody we 
could and then started calling the station. Every time 
we saw somebody, we would call the station and we 
started making our list of who saw who. 

Half an hour later they told everybody the 
building's leaning again. Everybody run north. 
Everybody got in their vehicles. My vehicle was packed 
with EMTs and paramedics in the back. Like a can of 
tuna in there. We jumped in the vehicle and we just 
gunned it to Chelsea Piers, the new staging area. That 
was the third one we went to. 

Q. You are talking about the second building 
collapse? 

A. Yes. 

Q. The first building hit? 

A. Right, the first building, it was already 
collapsed and after I guess the second building, they 
told us to start running again. That's when we took 
the ambulance to Chelsea Piers. I'm almost positive. 
I'm not sure. So we are at Chelsea Piers. We parked 
there, just waited for further instructions. We parked 
the vehicle facing south, so I made a L) turn. Parked 
by the pier facing south. Went to the nearest officer 



12 
0. MARTINEZ 



who was there. The highest rank was a Lieutenant; no 
chiefs, no captains. 

Q. Who was that? 

A. May have been. It was a Lieutenant, I think 
Miller. I'm not sure that's his name. I don't know if 
you know him. Went up to him, saying we are 01 Adam, 
we are here. He goes okay. So we just stood by the 
bus and we just waited. We just walked up and down a 
little bit, staying as close to the bus as we could and 
started looking for our members, anybody we knew. 
That's what everybody was doing, just looking for 
somebody they knew. 

There were too many Maydays already. We 
couldn't get through on the radio. People -- Mayday, 
help, trapped, can't get out. 

Q. But the radios were working? 

A. The radios were working. It was just very 
hard to transmit. 

Q. Anything else? Any other people that you saw 
down by the site, like officers, Chiefs, things like 
that? 

A. Chiefs. I saw Apuzzo, Captain Apuzzo. He 
finally came with a van full of people. 

Q. Was that during the collapse or after the 



13 
0. MARTINEZ 



collapse? 

A. That was at -- Chelsea Piers? I believe it 
was at Chelsea Piers. It may have been after the 
collapse. It was probably. That's about it. Most of 
the tour 2 I guess we saw there. Some tour one came 
over that worked the night before and were still 
lingering around came over. Tour 3 came a little bit 
earlier. They showed up. 

That's about it. As far as names and who I 
saw, there was a lot of people. I can't remember 
everybody. That's basically it. 

MR. DUN: At this time the interview is 

finished. It's 755 hours. 



File No. 9110184 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

EMT GREGG BRADY 

Interview Date: November 1, 2001 



Transcribed by Elisabeth F. Nason 



G. BRADY 

MR. DUN: Today's date is November 1, 2001. 

The time is 10:20 a.m. I am Richard Dun in the 

New York City Fire Department working with. 

Q. Fabiola? 

A. Quevedo, of the New York City Fire 
Department . 

Q. We are conducting an interview with -- 

A. Gregg Brady Battalion 4, EMT D. 

Q. Gregg, in your own words and description 
please describe the events of September 11, 2001 this 
year . 

A. Okay. I reported to work normally as I do, 
reported in at 8 a.m. At the time of the first crash, 
I was sitting in our office speaking with the ALS 
coordinator of Division 1, Esther Coarse, when we heard 
a loud bang, we both thought it was a sanitation truck, 
either dropped something or they crashed. Never 
thinking it was a plane. 

At that time, we heard a lot of talking on 
the radio and I got a call from Captain Mark Stone 
saying to load up vehicle 849, a Suburban, and be 
waiting for him downstairs. As he arrived, we 
proceeded down to the north tower of World Trade 
Center. As we were proceeding through the Battery Park 



G. BRADY 

tunnel, as we came out, we saw the second plane hit the 
south tower. At that time, traffic was very dense and 
it was very hard to get through. 

Q. Was it dense because there was debris on the 
ground yet? 

A. Yes, there was a lot of debris on the 
ground. There was a lot of people looking up, 
watching, a lot of people not knowing what to do. 

Q. Was it chaotic or anything like that? 

A. Yes. Very chaotic, people, they were 
evacuating busses and stuff like that. I managed to 
make my way through and I parked vehicle 849 across the 
street -- across from the south tower on the West Side 
Highway. At that time, me and Captain Stone met up 
with Chief Gombo, and Chief Gombo and Captain Stone 
proceeded on talking on what courses of action that we 
should take. 

After meeting -- after their meeting, Captain 
Stone proceeded to ask me to instruct 3 units to follow 
us into the north tower's lobby and set up a triage 
area. At the time, as we were going through, it was 
very chaotic. A lot of jumpers. Had a body laying 
about 20 feet to my right. 

Q. Were the radios working at that time? 



G. BRADY 

A. At that time radios were working, cell phones 
we were having a lot of trouble with. We proceeded 
through a broken window that the Fire Department broke 
to lead access into the south tower. We proceeded to 
set up a triage area. At that time plans changed and 
we transferred the triage area over to 7 World Trade 
Center, in the lobby. 

From that time, I proceeded with Captain 
Stone back into the south tower to meet up with Chief 
Gombo again. Chief Gombo proceeded outside, so we went 
outside and I found myself standing underneath the 
south tower. 

Exact place, I believe, was across the street 
near a toll booth. I remember a toll booth. At that 
time, as they were speaking we heard a loud rumble and 
we look up and we saw that the south tower was coming 
down. We all turned around to go run and all we saw 
was a building. I pretty much thought I was dead. I 
didn't see anywhere else to run. Although we saw a 
bunch of firemen running into an underground parking 
garage, so seeing that, I followed them into the 
underground parking garage and huddled against the wall 
waiting for the debris to come in. 
Q. Was Captain Stone in -- 



G. BRADY 

A. Yes, Captain Stone proceeded in. At that 
time, we lost each other. After all the debris stopped 
from coming in, I turned around and I couldn't even see 
my hand in front of my face. I had no clue where I 
was, I was breathing a lot of dust and concrete dust. 
It and was all globbing up in my mouth and I tried to 
spit it out and a bunch of firefighters turned on 
flashlights and started yelling come towards the 
light. 

We found an exit, the way out. We found an 
exit, the way out. We came out a side exit. Came out 
through a stairwell, a side exit of a stairwell on the 
bottom floor. Came around and proceeded around to the 
front of the second building. Actually -- 

Q. The first tower? 

A. The first tower. We were standing right over 
here. 

Q. The parking lot and the driveway is over 
here. 

A. There is an underground parking lot somewhere 
over here, right? 

Q. Right here. 

A. Okay. So we ran over here. 

Q. You came out in the Financial Center? 



G. BRADY 

A. Yes, we ran underneath 2 World Financial 
Center and we came out in front. I don't know how we 
came out. There must have been a side exit out. When 
we came out in front it was just as dark as it was out 
there. You know, we came outside and I thought -- I 
didn't even know we were outside it was just as dark as 
it was inside. 

From there, at that time I still lost Captain 
Stone, I hadn't seen him. I met up with Chief 
Carrasquillo. I met up with him outside. I know him 
from being Chief Ianarelli's aide. I met up with him. 
We proceeded to 3 World Financial Center, the American 
Express building and we -- they set up a plan of 
action. They set up a triage area in that lobby. 

Plans changed again. I met up with -- I saw 
Captain Stone in that lobby. They moved the triage 
area to -- I'm not sure what the building is called. 

Q. North End Avenue? 

A. North End Avenue and Vesey Street, there is a 
building right on the corner. At that time we 
proceeded into the middle of West Street directly 
underneath the north tower. At that time, I had a very 
tight feeling in my stomach, just experiencing what I 
went through with 2 World Trade Center, being that 



G. BRADY 

close. I didn't feel at ease at all. 

We were standing underneath and Captain Stone 
was speaking again. We heard -- I heard 3 loud 
explosions. I look up and the north tower is coming 
down now, 1 World Trade Center. 

Q. Did you see any fire Chiefs or anybody like 
that? 

A. I saw two fire Chiefs. I don't recall their 
names. I saw two fire Chiefs, Chief Basile, Captain 
Stone and I don't recall who else was over there. We 
were standing in a circle in the middle of West 
Street. They were talking about what was going on. 

At that time, when I heard the 3 loud 
explosions, I started running west on Vesey Street 
towards the water. At that time, I couldn't run fast 
enough. The debris caught up with me, knocked my 
helmet off. I tumbled and then eventually I started 
running again. I made it behind a building on North 
End Avenue. I set up a triage area in that corner 
building and at that time I started treating patients. 

I was standing around and I saw a whole bunch 
of patients coming in. I started treating -- I do 
remember treating a 3 star Chief from the Fire 
Department. He was on a backboard and we put oxygen on 



G. BRADY 

him, we are bringing in equipment. They were setting 
up ambulances outside to get them out. Was treating 
regular pedestrians, regular civilians. 

Q. Was there a lot of chaos at that time? 

A. A lot of chaos. Inside the building was 
Chief Gombo, Chief Pascale, Chief Basile, Captain Stone 
and a Lieutenant that I'm not sure -- I don't recall 
his name, from EMS. They were talking over a strategy 
of what else was going to happen, what they should do. 
At that time I left and I started treating patients 
again. 

After that, I left with Captain Stone to the 
West Side -- we left to go to the West Side Highway. 
I'm not exactly sure why or -- 

Q. Did you happen to go north or south? 

A. We went north on the West Side Highway, after 
they talked about what strategy. We started walking 
towards Chelsea Piers, because they set up a triage 
area up there. From what I remember, Captain Stone was 
injured during the second tower coming down, and we met 
up with Chief Randy Hirth and Lieutenant Grace 
Cacciola, and Captain Stone was transported to Bellevue 
for an x-ray on his shoulder. After he was released, 
we returned to Battalion 8 for about 20 minutes and we 



G. BRADY 

proceeded back down to Ground Zero. 

After that, we were -- I'm not sure. I 
believe we went up to Chelsea Piers and we started -- 

Q. With Chief Hirth? 

A. With Chief Hirth, Grace Cacciola and Captain 
Mark Stone. 

Q. So Mark came back? 

A. Yes, Mark came back. 

Q. You all went back to Chelsea Piers and that's 
where you stayed the rest of the tour or the remainder? 

A. We stayed up there for maybe I would say 
maybe half an hour, 40 minutes, then we proceeded back 
down to West and Chambers where they set up the command 
post for EMS, where Captain Stone met up with Chief 
Basile again, Chief Carrasquillo, Chief Pascale and 
Chief McCracken. They started laying out the plan for 

Q. Long term operations? 

A. Yes. For long term operations and from there 
I met up with Chief Steffens. At that time I was 
acting as his aide because Chief Ianarelli is out on 
medical at this moment. We were instructed to head up 
to Chelsea Piers and Chief Steffens was to take command 
of Chelsea Piers. At that time, I acted as his aide, 



10 

G. BRADY 



recovering information as well. 
Q. Okay. So that's -- 
A. That's basically my experience. 

MR. DUN: Okay. This concludes the 
interview. The time is 1030 hours. 



File No. 9110186 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

EMT MALA HARRILAL 

Interview Date: November 2, 2001 



Transcribed by Elisabeth F. Nason 



M. HARRILAL 



MR. CASTORINA: Today is November 2, 2001. 

I'm Ron Castorina from the New York City Fire 

Department. We are here at Battalion 31 

conducting an interview. 

Q. With me is? 

A. Richard Dun from the New York City Fire 
Department . 

Q. Your name, ma'am? 

A. Mala Harrilal, Battalion 31. 

Q. What is your rank? 

A. EMT-D. 

Q. The time now is 0540 hours. 

On September 11, 2001, on that particular 
day, could you tell me the events that took place that 
you remember? 

A. Yes, about minutes to nine o'clock I heard on 
the radio, a unit was saying that a plane just crashed 
into the World Trade Center and both me and my partner 
drove down by the water in Red Hook. That's my 
assigned area and you could see -- we saw the smoke. 
There was a second plane circling the building and I 
kept saying why is he so near the building? Within 
minutes, before even talking about it, he just like 
slammed into the second building. 



M. HARRILAL 

We got on the radio, called the dispatcher. 
She said fine, we were assigned to the job. Took the 
Brooklyn Battery Tunnel. We were stuck in the tunnel 
for a couple of minutes and as we got out of the tunnel 
on the West Side Highway, there were cars crumbled and 
crushed all over. There were body parts on the 
street. I saw something that looked like a helmet, but 
it wasn't a helmet. It was a head. 

We made the left, right on to Liberty Street, 
where we saw the other units. Within minutes there 
were like Chiefs. I saw Chief Grant, Chief McCracken, 
and they were all setting up the staging area where 
they told us, the command center in fact, where they 
told to us move the busses and park. Stood there 
looking at the building burning, saw within 5 minutes, 
I thought that like 16 people jumping off the building. 

Q. Who were you with, who was your partner? 

A. Frank Pastor. At one point I couldn't take 
it again, because I would keep yelling can we go help 
them, can we go help them. But he is like you can't, 
because the scene wasn't safe. So there was nothing we 
could do. 

Q. How far back from you from the scene, where 
were you from the building? Were you like a block 



M. HARRILAL 

away? 

A. Like two blocks away, two blocks away, where 
we were parked, so I can't even tell you where 
exactly. We were a little by Liberty State Park, to 
the side. I saw a couple of the crew members that I 
knew on 31 David and some medics from Woodhull. I told 
my partner, I said if you need me I will be standing 
right by my ambulance. 

As I turn around and I'm coming back, all I 
heard was don't turn back, just run. I look up, saw 
the building coming towards you. Keep running, I 
couldn't see anything, I couldn't breathe. I couldn't 
see anything, just that jet sound. Everybody was like 
pulling people inside stores. I just like -- while 
running, stopped to help this EMT from Jersey, I think, 
she fell down and broke her arm in like 3 places. 
Picked her up like three times and kept running. 

Somebody pulled me into a store, pulled us 
both into a store, some of those Hatzolah guys. Got 
into the store and just keep yelling, where is the 
back, where is the back door, where is the back door. 
There was no back door. We look around, all you could 
see was alcohol. It was a liquor store. At that point 
in time, the debris got lighter. 



M. HARRILAL 

Chief McCracken ended up coming in and yelled 
get out of here, this is not a good place to stay. So 
at that point, I was just getting out -- 

Q. Who were you with in the store, you and your 
partner or -- 

A. No, my partner and I were split up. 

Q. You were with some civilians? 

A. Yes, mostly Hatzolah guys and civilians. 
They gave us water. It was just to wash your eyes and 
keep running again. We ran so far, I mean my last 
resort was jumping into the water. At that point in 
time I think that's when we saw Chief Grant, Chief 
McCracken and I ended up with my partner. People were 
just yelling, please help us. 

Q. How many injuries were you seeing, the ones 
that were running? 

A. Mostly they couldn't breathe and their eyes. 
The Hatzolah guys were running out with medics from 
Maimonides, medics from New York Cornell that were 
injured. They had them on long boards and stretchers 
and they were just running with them. So when the 
people started screaming, Chief Grant got -- Chief 
Grant and Chief McCracken, they both got on the radio 
and asked for boats. Within 5 minutes boats were 



M. HARRILAL 

there. Circle Line, New York Waterways, even tug boats 
were there. 

At that point in time, we couldn't do 
anything but help the people get on to the boats. So 
we first started with the kids, then the parents, then, 
you know, basically got everybody off that area. I 
guess at that time it was just like us alone there, us 
and the cops. There were a lot of under cover cops, a 
lot of detectives, and we kind of basically got out of 
that area, because at one point they were talking the 
building that we were standing by was burning, was -- 
fumes, gas fumes. 

So we got out there and that's where we met 
everybody else from -- all the guys from the academy, 
all the other Lieutenants. They brought back our 
ambulances. Then we drove down -- further down near 
the Battery Tunnel, I guess, to meet everybody else. 

Q. This was the first collapse, correct? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Then what happened, then the second collapse 
came, you weren't there for the second collapse? 

A. No, no, it was the first collapse and by 2:00 
we were dismissed from there. Because we had -- when 
we got back our ambulance, there was no equipment in 



M. HARRILAL 

the ambulances. My ambulance was blown off, the 
windows were blown out. Even my cellphone was gone. 
We had nothing. We were totally wiped, covered. 

Q. Initially when you were there and the first 
building came down and you ran and all these events 
took place, then somewhere in that time frame like an 
hour later, the second building -- 

A. The second building came down. 

Q. But you weren't involved with that part, 
because you were already out of the area, you were by 
the boat loading people? 

A. Right, because we heard the explosion. We 
wasn't there. 

Q. Right. 

A. It was just like -- I think the second 
building, I could be wrong, but the second building 
that fell crumbled. It's the first building that 
fell. It actually came down, so - - I really didn't 
witness the second building at all. 

By 2:00 we were dismissed from the scene and 
went to the Battalion. 

Q. Were you injured in anyway or your breathing 

A. I have asthma. For the first week I was 



M. HARRILAL 

fine, the second week I started coughing. By the end 
of the second week I started wheezing. 

Q. How were your eyes? 

A. At first my glasses were messed up, I had to 
go get new lenses and I have been taking the pump ever 
since. 

Q. How is your partner, your partner made it out 
of there okay? 

A. Yes. He is fine. 

Q. Anything else you can think of that you want 
to add? 

A. No, I felt -- I mean what was bothering me 
the most is that that's what we are there to do, to 
help people and at that point in time, there was no way 
of helping anybody, but to help yourself, to run for 
your life, and that's all I kept saying and praying, 
Lord help me, I'm not ready to die yet. I'm glad my 
partner is safe. 

I saw Chief McCracken and Chief Grant. They 
were okay. I don't know. I'm glad to be alive. So it 
felt good, me going back Tuesday, because I wanted to 
go back ever since, but there was really no time to go 
and then at one point when I figured -- you know, 
thinking about the smell of the place and everything, I 



M. HARRILAL 

might have a hard time with it. 

So I finally went back on Tuesday and it was 
fine. At least I knew I was there for 14 hours, 12 
hours, 12 to 14 hours, to help people who needed to be 
helped . 

Q. Right, the other day? 

A. Yes, last week. So I felt much better. 

MR. CASTORINO: Okay. This concludes the 

interview. The time now is 0550 hours. Thank 

you. 



File No. 9110187 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

PARAMEDIC EDGARD SUAREZ 

Interview Date: November 2, 2001 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



E. SUAREZ 2 

MR. CASTORINA: Today is November 2nd, 
2001. The time now is 0625 hours. I'm Ron 
Castorina, New York City Fire Department, at 
Battalion 31 conducting an interview. With 
me is 

MR. DUN: Richard Dun, New York City 
Fire Department. 

MR. CASTORINA: And your name, sir? 

PARAMEDIC SUAREZ: Edgard Suarez. 

MR. CASTORINA: What is your rank and 
title? 

PARAMEDIC SUAREZ: Paramedic. 

MR. CASTORINA: Paramedic? Where are 
you assigned to? 

PARAMEDIC SUAREZ: Battalion 31. 
Q. On September 11th, 2001, what were you 
assigned to that day? 
A. Yes, I was. 

Q. What unit were you assigned to? 
A. I was working 31 Victor Tour 2. 
Q. Can you tell me on that day the events 
that took place that you remember? 

A. I stayed for a double tour, and about 
8:30 or 8:35 we were assigned to the World Trade 



E. SUAREZ i 

Center. When we got there -- 

Q. Who were you working with that day? 

A. I was working with Paramedic 
Cherrington, Andre Cherrington. 

Q. Andre Cherrington? 

A. Yes. 

We crossed the Brooklyn Bridge, and we 
arrived at Broadway between Fulton and Cortlandt 
Street. We were sitting right in front of the 
Millennium Hotel. 

Q. At that point the first plane had hit? 

A. That was right after the first plane 
had hit . 

Q. After the first plane had hit? 

A. Yeah. We hadn't seen the second 
building on fire. 

We were triaging in that area. There 
were many people requesting ALS, so we were 
triaging people, people having chest pains. 

Q. This was in front of the Millennium 
Hotel? 

A. Right in front of the Millennium Hotel. 
People were coming to us with 
lacerations, bleeding all over. We were trying 



E. SUAREZ 4 

to do our best. There was two firefighters 
brought this guy with about 85 to 90 percent 
burns, major burns, first degree and third degree 
burns. So we started taking care of this guy. 
We started an IV on him. 

There was a female lieutenant that 
wanted us to stay to take more patient with us. 
This guy was in such severe respiratory distress. 

Q. You had him on your ambulance? You 
were getting ready to transport him? 

A. Yeah, he was on board. He was ready to 
transport. So we decided to start moving. We 
were about one block away when the first building 
collapsed. People were running toward us, 
banging the ambulance, "Open the ambulance." We 
just couldn't do it. 

Q. Were you able to get out of there and 
take the patient? 

A. Yeah, we got out of there. We were 
pretty lucky. 

Q. What hospital did you go to? 

A. We went to New York Cornell Burn 
Center . 

Q. Then when you were done with the 



E. SUAREZ I 

patient, did you return back to the scene? 

A. Yeah, we went back. We were assigned 
to the West Side Highway where they had -- 

Q. At that point when you went back, had 
the second building collapsed or first building 
collapsed? 

A. Yeah, the second building. 

Q. Both buildings were collapsed already? 

A. Yeah, we were listening to the news 
when the second building collapsed. 

Q. You went back there to triage? 

A. Yeah, actually we were sitting on the 
West Side Highway when we hear that there was 
like a gas leak. There was so much panic, 
everybody running. We were a couple feet away 
from the ambulance. So we actually left the 
ambulance behind. When we came back after 
everything settled down, I guess it was. 

Q. In was what, the second time when you 
came back, you're talking about, the gas leak? 

A. Yes. 

Q. You were down by where? 

A. That was the West Side Highway. 

Q. And where; do you remember? 



E. SUAREZ 



A. West Side and about Murray Street. 

Q. Murray Street and the West Side 
Highway? 

A. Yes. 

Q. There was a triage area there that was 
set up? 

A. Yeah. Actually there was like a 
staging area. There was many ambulance, many PD 
cars. We were there waiting for hopefully going 
to help somebody. When the news came that it was 
a gas leak, everybody started running. 

Q. Everybody left their vehicles and left? 

A. Yes, we actually left our vehicle 
behind. When we came back for it, it was gone. 

Q. What happened? 

A. We just couldn't find it. Somebody 
took it away or -- I don't know. 
Then we went to -- 

Q. You had left the keys in the ambulance 
because of the staging area? 

A. Yes. I have the extra key, and the 
other key was in the ignition. My partner was 
driving, so he left his key. 

Q. Was the vehicle ever found later on? 



E. SUAREZ 7 

A. Yes, the vehicle showed up. 

Q. Somebody must have just pulled it out 
of the area? 

A. Yes. We saw it later that day like 
seven, eight hours after. They had it at the 
morgue moving bodies. 

That's about it. 

Q. Okay. Anything you want to add? 

A. No. 

MR. CASTORINA: The time now is 0627 

hours. This concludes the interview. Thank 

you. 



File No. 91101? 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

EMT LAURA SIEBUHR 

Interview Date: November 2, 2001 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



L. SIEBUHR 2 

MR. RADENBERG: Today is November 2nd, 
2001. I'm Paul Radenberg of the Fire 
Department, City of New York, conducting an 
interview with -- 

EMT SIEBUHR: Laura J. Siebuhr, EMT 
5478, Battalion 45. 

MR. RADENBERG: This interview is being 
conducted at EMS Battalion 45 regarding the 
events of the morning of September 11th, 
2001. 

Q. Laura, if you would begin with when you 
first became aware of the incident. 

A. Okay. My partner and I were actually 
getting coffee first thing in the morning. We 
were within our 89, which is our cross street 
location. We noticed there was fire in the 
distance. From where we sit in our 89, we have a 
whole view of the skyline, and obviously it's 
fairly close. 

So my partner said exactly, "Holy shit, 
Laura, that's the Trade Center on fire." I told 
him to shut up, no way. He said, "Well, let's 
take a closer look to get away from all the trees 
and everything." So we drove up closer. My 



L. SIEBUHR 3 

partner Patrick said, "Oh, my God, Laura, that is 
the Trade Center on fire," and I agreed. 

He called central and said, "This is 45 
David. Central, did you know that the Trade 
Center was on fire?" Everything was completely 
silent, I would say for maybe a good 15, 20 
seconds. Everything was just completely silent. 
There was nothing on the air, which was highly 
irregular, because there's always activity going 
on over the air. 

I remember the silence. I don't 
remember who was dispatching at the time, but 
they started dispatching units out, and 45 David 
was one of them, which was my unit. They told us 
to transfer over to citywide and report to I 
believe the 59th Street Bridge. We were very 
close at that point. We were told to continue to 
I believe West and Vesey or Church and Vesey. 
I'm not clear. I have no really working 
knowledge of Manhattan. 

We did as we were told. As we were 
getting closer, you could see that it was just a 
horrific sight. Going over that bridge I'll 
never forget. It was bad. Actually I didn't 



L. SIEBUHR 4 

really know too much when I went in to work, 
being that I had never been to an MCI before. 

We saw other ambulances on the opposite 
side of the bridge trying to get through, but for 
some reason we were flying and we were bypassing 
everybody. I don't know why, I don't remember 
how, because this was so much traffic. For some 
reason we just had a straight way. 

People were just getting out of our way 
so quickly that we got there I believe within 
less than eight minutes from where we were, which 
should have taken us a lot longer than that. I 
guess because at the location where we were 
trying to see, we were pretty close, even to the 
bridge . 

We got there, and there was a lot of 
people running out of the building. I didn't see 
any other ambulance units there other than 
Hazollah. I didn't even know where any Manhattan 
units were. I guess the thing had just hit, so 
within that span. Everybody was within traffic. 
Everybody was trying to get in there all at once. 

My partner and I got out. Being the 
other unit was there, Hazollah was there, we were 



L. SIEBUHR 5 

making a make-fast triage underneath the second 
tower, the next tower over. I get them confused, 
tower one, tower two. I don't know, just 
everything happened so fast. 

As people were coming out of the first 
tower that was hit, we were bringing them over 
and we were triaging them. Those people were 
pretty bad. We were basically sectioning them 
off and tagging them who goes where, the most 
critical and the least critical. 

We would section them off, and we were 
putting them on buses, not ambulances but regular 
city buses, so they could transport them out 
because there wasn't enough units there. We 
couldn't leave because there was too many people. 
People were very, very bad, very bad. 

I was so geared to working on the 
patients and trying to focus -- you didn't have 
time to think. You did not have time to think 
about anything. People were hurt so badly. I 
remember just hearing a very low hum, I guess 
because I was focused on what I was doing with 
the patients . 

But I do remember hearing a very low 



L. SIEBUHR 6 

hum in the background, which people will probably 
tell you different, but this is what I heard; and 
then just a massive explosion, and that was loud, 
because I was standing right underneath it when 
the second plane had hit. 

My partner ran and grabbed me by my arm 
and started yelling at me to run. So he was 
actually holding onto me and making me run 
quicker. Still I didn't know what was happening. 
I didn't know it was a plane. I just thought it 
was an explosion from the other tower. I didn't 
know a plane had hit. So I'm pretty much 
oblivious on what's really going on at this point 
because everything is happening so fast. 

We ran and we got maybe less than a 
quarter of a block, less than half a block, 
maybe. I don't really remember. But I remember 
we were still right there. Within minutes later, 
over the radio or somebody had said, "Oh, my God, 
the Pentagon got hit and this is war, we're at 



L. SIEBUHR 



|. You 
breathe because when the second plane hit, all 
that debris, it was like cement. It just filled 
up your throat, it filled up your lungs, you 
could not breathe. You were actually spitting 
out huge particles. It was like it manifested 
itself in your mouth because it was so small and 
it filled up. You couldn't breathe. It was just 
caked in your throat. 

My partner says, "All right. Listen, 
stay with this unit." My unit was directly in 
front. He said, "Stay with the unit, and I'm 
going to go back." 



Maybe within -- I don't know really 
time frame. I don't know time frame. But there 
was a command or somebody had said the units had 
to start moving. It wasn't that long after. I 
was sitting in the back of one of the units, and 
I don't remember what unit it was. 

I said, you know what, I'm not going to 
go with these units. I've got to go back. I've 



L. SIEBUHR 8 

got to find my partner and make sure that he's 
okay. I didn't really feel threatened at this 
point. Some time had passed, not much but some, 
to where I was able to gain some composure about 
myself and I wanted to find my partner. I needed 
to find him. It was very important that I had 
him and I knew where he was . 

So I started walking back. The next 
thing that I know, I was just about there, and a 
firefighter, which I really wish I knew who it 
was. I have no idea who this person was, but a 
firefighter started running and he said -- this 
is another one he actually grabbed my arm. He 
said, "Oh, my God, Honey, run." 

I looked up, and it looked like the 
tower was leaning. I was almost underneath it, 
so it actually looked like it was leaning. So 
you didn't know which way to run. You just saw a 
lot of firefighters and police and EMS and all of 
the major people that were down there to try and 
rectify the situation before it got any worse 
started running, and I didn't know why. Not in 
my wildest dreams did I ever think that this was 
going to come down. 



L. SIEBUHR 9 

So he grabbed my arm and he said, 
"Honey, run," and he started running with me. I 
said, "Oh, my God, are we going to die?" He 
said, "I don't know. Just keep running." Then 
the loud rumble, and then that thing, that 
monster, just started coming down. 

They teach you in the academy about the 
feeling of impending doom a patient might feel. 
I have never had that feeling up until that day. 
I knew that this was it. I knew that this is how 
I'm going out. The only thing that ran through 
my mind was -- other than saying the "Our Father" 
as I was running, "God, please don't let this 
hurt." I thought it was going to hurt. Just 
"God, make it quick." 

I was running, and the fireman had let 
my arm go. He had gone one way and I kept 
running. I remember there was a building on my 
left-hand side, and I don't remember what 
building it was . I remember not being able to 
run very fast because of fear, and my radio and 
my helmet was weighing me down. So I threw off 
my helmet. I threw my radio, which was found, by 
the way. It was unbelievable. 



L. SIEBUHR 10 

I just remember I couldn't run, the 
fear was -- you could not run. You're just 
stricken. I just remember just heat. I felt the 
heat and the smoke just eat me up. But right 
before it did, this building to my left, I 
remember approaching it, wanting to say, well, 
I've got to get some kind of cover. I got sucked 
in by that huge cloud. Not sucked in but I 
guess -- 

Q. Enveloped? 

A. Yeah. Then I really couldn't breathe 
and panic and disorientation. 

I came up to the building, and the 
doors, they slid open from side to side. They 
were electric. That I remember because I 
couldn't find the handle, and I'm banging on the 
door. I couldn't breathe. You just could not 
breathe. Whatever you did, there was nothing to 
do to get away from it. You just could not 
breathe . 

I was banging on the door, and somebody 
had -- a girl or a woman had got the doors open 
for me, and I just kind of fell in. All I wanted 
to do was just breathe, get my lungs -- you know, 



L. SIEBUHR 11 

I couldn't catch air. 

Then I got into this building, and I 
paced and paced and paced, and that's all I did 
was pace. I was so worried about my partner. I 
was crying a lot. I wanted -- I needed to find 
him, because I didn't know anybody. I didn't 
have anybody with me. I was alone, except some 
of the people in the building. I didn't know if 
we were going to get hit again. It was bad. It 
was really, really bad. 

During that time in the building, I 
didn't know that the second one had gone down. I 
had no idea the other building -- I didn't know. 
About a half an hour later I was looking outside. 
It got to the point where you could actually see 
your hand in front of your face. Things started 
lifting . 

The only thing that I had on me was my 
phone, so all I'm trying to do is call my family 
and tell them get in your car and go east, 
because I didn't know. I just wanted them to get 
out of harm's way, you know. 

Then I wanted to go outside, and some 
of the people said, "My God, don't go out there." 



L. SIEBUHR 12 

I still needed to find my partner. I was very 
adamant about it, and arrogant I was, because I 
was panicking and just "Don't touch me. Just 
leave me alone. Just let me think." I didn't 
have my radio on me. I had no radio contact, and 
I was freaking. 

Some old woman gave me a wet scarf to 
put around my face, and I went out, which I 
thought was very sweet. I went out and I started 
again heading back to the Trade Center. I wasn't 
far. I mean, I was just not even up the block. 
It was not even a block, that I can remember. 

I can't even recall what building it 
was; I can't. I don't know which one it was. I 
had gone there repeatedly and tried to find this 
building I was in when I do the Trade Center and 
do my overtime there, because I've been back 
there twice a week every week. I do the overtime 
and stuff. And I can't remember. 

I started making my way back to the 
Trade Center. When I got there I saw a lot of 
people. I didn't hear anybody talking. The only 
thing I heard was those loud tones. That's all I 
heard was those tones. I guess it was the 



L. SIEBUHR 13 

firemen looking for their own. That's all I 
heard was those tones and me looking for my 
partner, calling, "Patrick." 

A fireman came over to me and said, 
"Make your way back to the peers, or start going 
to the peers. Just get out of here." I was at 
the corner, so I wasn't like -- there was so much 
stuff everywhere, so much. It looked like 
Armageddon. Everything was just gonel 



^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^| We started making our way 
back to the piers. I still didn't know anybody. 
They were all unfamiliar faces . 

About an hour and a half, two hours 
later, I see my captain, and there went my 
professionalism I 



L. SIEBUHR 



14 



Finally after about an hour and a half, 
almost two hours that I can remember, in a 
fireman's jacket and an SCBA on his back and a 
hood, I thought I saw him. This person came 
closer, and there went my professionalism again, 
and I knew he was alive. And cling, held on 
tight to him. I was so relieved that he was 
alive . 

Even now I get emotional because to 
lose him, I would be losing such a big part of my 
life, because since I got on this job and came to 
this battalion, he has taught me everything that 
I need to know. He also saved my life by putting 
me in somewhat of a safe spot to where if I 
wasn't at the ambulance and him pulling me and 
running with me after the second plane hit and 
putting me in a safe place, I probably would have 



L. SIEBUHR 15 

been gone and would have followed him because he 
went into the building. 

I probably would not be here if it 
weren't for him, and I hold a lot of respect for 
him and I love him for it, because he let me go 
home to my daughter, which a lot of people 
didn ' t . 

Q. Right. 

A. We started making it to the piers. The 
calvary was there. Everyone was there. And I 
got to go home that night. 

That's all I can remember. 

Q. What's your partner's last name? 

A. Richiusa. 

Q. When you first got down there to the 
Trade Center, do you remember seeing, aside -- 
you said the Hazollah ambulance. Any other kind 
of EMS personnel? 

A. Yes. You know what it was? There was 
a lot of people there. I remember nurses being 
there. I remember doctors being there. I 
remember people saying that they were nurses and 
doctors. I remember people saying that they were 
EMTs and paramedics that were off-duty. I 



L. SIEBUHR 16 

remember a lot of ununiformed people were there, 
a lot . 

Forgive me, and I could be wrong but 
the only other ambulance that I saw at that 
moment was Hazollah. I could be wrong, but 
that's what I remember. 

Q. Okay. 

A. I remember pulling up and thinking -- I 
remember actually thinking, my God, we came from 
Queens and although we made it here so fast, 
where the hell are the Manhattan units? Where 
are they? I remember seeing fire trucks, a lot 
of them, but I don't remember seeing FDNY 
ambulances. I don't remember. I could be wrong, 
but that's what I remember. 

I remember thinking to myself where are 
they, and I just remember seeing Hazollah. And 
how I remember that -- I don't even know if I'm 
pronouncing it right, but I just remember seeing 
the curls on the side of their heads. I think 
they're Hasidic. 

Q. Yeah. 

A. I'm not clear on it. They were awfully 
nice. They were so nice. And we did work 



L. SIEBUHR 17 

together. I believe it was four of them and 
Patrick and I. I remember directing the people 
that would come out of the first tower that was 
hit. They were so bad. 

I mean, people did not -- people were 
coming out and didn't have any hair on their 
bodies and on their heads and on their faces. I 
remember facial hair was so singed off and badly 
burned and them saying that they were several 
floors underneath. I don't really know how it 
works when a plane hits . I know nothing about 
it. 

But I remember a lot of screaming, and 
I remember people falling out of the buildings or 
jumping. I remember seeing it. I remember just 
a lot of smoke, a lot of crying, a lot of people 
going into shock, a lot of talk about elevators 
inside the building. 

I just remember people talking about 
elevators, that they weren't working or that it 
fell -- it felt like it fell several floors and 
hit a specific floor hard and people were 
complaining about back pain and skin hanging from 
their bodies and being in a lot of pain. A lot 



L. SIEBUHR 18 

of pain. Everybody was just -- there was a lot 
of pain. It was very heartbreaking. 

Me only coming out of the academy nine 
months, ten months. I knew nothing except just 
keep bandaging them up, keep oxygen on them, and 
put them on where they need to go. Next. It was 
fast and furious. You didn't have time to think. 

That's all I really can remember, and 
just feeling very badly and very scared. I never 
in my wildest dreams ever think those buildings 
would come down, never, never. When I saw my 
partner, he was badly hurt. He got stitched up 
on the scene, with a leatherman tool, no less, 
his own tool. 

A doctor, he said he's never done it 
with a tool, but I think he got 13, 15 stitches, 
some on his back, some on his shoulder. He 
didn't have the correct tool to do it with. Pat 
whipped out his tool and he said, "Well, you can 
use this." He actually started sewing him up 
without anything, just a needle and thread, and 
showed him up with his leatherman. And he blew 
out his knee, which I believe he had to get 
surgery for. 



L. SIEBUHR 19 

And that's all I can really remember, 
and just being extremely happy that I was going 
home to my little girl and able to tell my family 
that I was alive, because my mom knew that I was 
down there and my sister actually in Colorado 
knew I was there and saw it on TV and knew I was 
there. So they knew that I was gone. They 
actually thought I was gone. I was just happy to 
be home . 

That's the best of my recollection 
moment to moment. I mean, it's also two months 
later . 

Also actually what I do remember, one 
thing that I neglected to say, that on the way 
there, there were two priests that were begging 
to stop us. They were saying, "Please take us 
with you. There are so many people down there 
that need their last rites." So I said, "Get 
in, " and we took them. 

Whether that's against the rules or 
not, I don't know. But you know what? There 
were people down there that needed it. And 
whether they made it out of there alive, I don't 
know. I hope they did. But I thought that was 



L. SIEBUHR 20 

the right thing to do. My partner and I both 
agreed on it. 

I basically threw these old men in 
there. I threw them in, "Get in," not even 
thinking of any kind of repercussions of 
anything, because I didn't know what we were 
going into. I just knew that it was a huge MCI. 
I didn't know that it was a plane at that point. 
I just knew that it was big and that there were 
more than likely hundreds of casualties because 
of what it looked like, not knowing what caused 
it. 

We picked them up and we brought them 
in, because I knew that there were going to be 
people that perished in whatever happened. And 
we did, we picked them up and we brought them 
over there. 

Q. What's your 89 location? 

A. My 89 is — oh, God, Metropolitan and 
Forest, which gives you a complete view of the 
whole skyline. 

Q. Right. 

A. You're not far at all. It's like an 
arm's length away. You're looking and you're 



L. SIEBUHR 21 

like, wow, you can see the whole entire skyline. 

That's basically all I can remember 
that day, that disgusting day. 

Q. Any other thoughts or comments you'd 
like to add? 



With that said, I'm done. 
MR. RADENBERG: The time is now 0658, 
and the interview is concluded. 



File No. 9110189 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

CAPTAIN HOWARD SICKLES 

Interview Date: November 2, 2001 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



H. SICKLES 2 

MR. RADENBERG: Today is November 2nd, 
2001. The time is now 0526. I'm Paul 
Radenberg of the Fire Department, City of 
New York, conducting an interview with. 

CAPTAIN SICKLES: Captain Howard 
Sickles, commanding officer of EMS, 
Battalion 45. 

MR. RADENBERG: This interview is being 
conducted at EMS Battalion 45 regarding the 
events of September 11th, 2001. 
Q. Captain. 

A. On that morning I was assigned to the 
battalion because I didn't have a command 
vehicle. I was running the ambulance station as 
I normally do. A call went out, and I see 
notification that there was a plane into the 
building at the World Trade Center. 

I went outside. The TV was on, and I 
saw the devastation from the first plane hitting 
the tower that was broadcasted on CNN. 

I sent messages to Howie Hahn 
Lieutenant Hahn -- he was on patrol -- to pick me 
up, and we started out to the Trade Center. I 
called the tour commander to let him know that we 



H. SICKLES 3 

were going and did he want us to go to what 
location, because they were staging ambulances 
around the city. He advised me to go directly 
into the site. 

On arrival we staged at Church and 
West, and I walked down to the command post, 
which was in the first floor or the lobby level 
of the north tower of the World Trade Center. 
Chief Gombo was there with Ross Terranova, and I 
believe Chief Kowalczyk was at that point also 
there . 

Things were a little confusing. They 
were trying to put an operation together. The 
windows of the north tower on the ground floor 
were blown out, were broken. I don't know if 
they were blown out, but they were most certainly 
broken. There was a lot of glass. That was 
actually how I entered; I walked through one of 
the windowpanes, or where there would have been a 
window, into the building and started going 
through the doors . 

I saw there was really no command post 
set up. It was a little haphazard. Commissioner 
Feehan was in the lobby. I asked him if there 



H. SICKLES 4 

were any spare command boards around. He told me 
there should be outside. Any chief car that 
pulls up should have one. 

I went outside. I believe it was the 
Division 6 car was just arriving. I told him I 
need his command board and I had Commissioner 
Feehan's permission. I got the command board 
from him. 

Actually as I exited the building, I 
thought somebody hit me from the back, tapped me 
on my back. I turned around and didn't see 
anything. Somebody pointed to my feet. I 
looked, and there was a body on the floor. So 
apparently he's what brushed against me, hitting 
me in the back, because it wasn't there, it was 
behind me. I had just walked there. So I knew 
that body fell. So I'm pretty lucky I wasn't hit 
then . 

I walked over to the chief's car. I 
got the command board. I walked back into the 
building, and Chief Kowalczyk said, "Let's go." 
And I took 4 9 Henry with me so we would have an 
ambulance crew there with us. Chief Kowalczyk 
said, "Come on, let's go. We're all out of here. 



H. SICKLES 5 

We're going across the street." 

We went across the street and we set up 
in what would be, I'm assuming, is Three World 
Financial Center. We were in the garage -- we 
were in the throat of the driveway. We put up 
the command board. We started drawing the 
towers, putting this all together, and we 
decided -- I told him, we need to put this all 
onto one frequency because citywide's too 
congested and we need to have a point-to-point 
frequency and a dispatcher to come to. 

I went inside. I spoke to Chief Diggs 
on the telephone. I told him what our needs 
were. He was a little argumentative. He didn't 
want to do it because of the high call volume in 
Manhattan south. I said, "You can give us any 
frequency. Manhattan south was just a 
suggestion . " 

He put me on hold. I said, "I'm not 
waiting here all day." I left. I sent an EMT 
back inside to call Chief Diggs and to wait. We 
were at command post operations. We started to 
set things up. 

We sent Chief Brown to the south side 



H. SICKLES 6 

to the south tower to see what was going on 
there, to give us a reported. He took a package 
which included Captain Deshore and a couple of 
ambulances, and some of them were volunteers. 

Ambulance crews were showing up at the 
command post. Maimonides Medical Center showed 
up with an ambulance with a transfer truck of 
their' s with a couple of paramedics on it and a 
supervisor. We sent them back to go north, and 
they ended up not taking the direction. I saw 
the ambulance later on and it was crushed but 
there was nobody in it. So that worked out well 
but they didn't listen and they didn't take 
direction . 

We were at the command post. We had 
assigned Lieutenant Medjuck along with Captain 
Olszewski was on West and I believe around Church 
Street, there on West and Vesey, at first West 
and Barclay, in that neighborhood. I don't 
remember exactly where they were, but they were 
in that neighborhood, on that side of the 
operation . 

Chief Brown was to the south. We had 
nobody on Trinity or Church that I was aware of. 



H. SICKLES 7 

He actually may have been around Vesey and 
Trinity -- Vesey and Church. I don't remember 
the exact location; I just know he was on the 
north side of the operation with Captain 
Olszewski. We were trying to divide it up and 
get everybody assets in order that they can 
handle. Chief Goldfarb was down at staging. 

We heard a rumbling. We thought it was 
another plane. We looked up, and you actually 
saw the towers just starting to roll down at you. 
You saw the building portions coming down. I 
stood there and couldn't move. I just couldn't 
move. I couldn't believe what I was looking at. 

A couple seconds later I turned around 
and started to go. You just saw a sea of 
humanity. Before that we were at the command 
post. Chief Nigro and Chief Ganci were behind 
me, and they just couldn't believe the human 
devastation of watching people jumping out of the 
upper floors . They were hitting the ground and 
because of the force of hitting the ground, they 
would break open and blood was splattering and 
body parts and you could see them hitting the 
ground and bouncing and parts bouncing up. 



H. SICKLES 8 

They were just like, "Oh, my God, oh, 
my --" and they couldn't believe the devastation; 
nobody could. Everyone was sort of standing 
there in a little bit of awe, trying to get this 
under way and just watching people jumping for 
their life. 

To go back to where I was before, 
everybody went through the building. Lieutenant 
Moore was in front of me. The building had a 
grating for water run off as it goes down so it 
doesn't go into the garage. He apparently 
tripped on that grating and fell. I was right 
behind him. I fell over Roger, and we tumbled 
maybe some 20 feet into this garage. We really 
didn't get anywhere. 

Q. That was in Three Financial Center? 
A. I believe that was Three Financial 
Center. That's where we were, just across the 
street. I'm not sure if it was three or two, 
because we were directly across from the tower. 
I'm not sure which one is directly across. It 
might have been Two World Financial Center. It 
was directly across. It may have been two. It's 
hard to tell from this map. 



H. SICKLES 9 

Q. Right. 

A. I don't remember whether it was the 
American Express building or two. But looking at 
it more closely, it's probably Two World 
Financial Center, right across the street, 
because we weren't very close to the pedestrian 
bridge. So I would tell you it was probably Two 
World Financial Center. I have to change that. 
I believe the garage was Two World Financial 
Center . 

Q. Okay. 

A. So we were directly across the street. 
Everybody ran into the building. And Roger and I 
fell over each other. We made it like maybe 20 
feet into the building. 

You just heard a rumbling and you heard 
things, and it got very black. You couldn't see 
anything, nothing. There was no light. I 
couldn't move my legs. I couldn't move myself. 
I really thought at one point I was dead. I 
couldn't see my hand. I couldn't think of 
anything. I was in no pain. I just really 
thought I was dead. 

It was dark. You couldn't hear 



H. SICKLES 10 

anything. There was no sounds. There was 
nothing. There was no sound in the background. 
There was nothing, no noise. Beforehand there 
was noise because there were fire alarms going 
off -- not fire alarms, the pass alarms from the 
SCBAs . They were going off early, because I had 
said at the command post can we shut those stupid 
things off. They were going off early. I'm sure 
they were going off when we were running down the 
hill. 

After the first collapse, it was dark, 
it was black, it was just deadly silent. I 
really thought I was dead. I started talking to 
myself, and then Roger Moore, in a couple of 
seconds, moans and tells me to "Shut up. You're 
not dead. " 

So I still couldn't move, and I was 
telling him, "I can't move. I can't move." He's 
telling me he can't move. A couple of firemen 
came by, and I don't know who they are -- I 
didn't know who they were. They lifted off what 
looked like to be a desk later on, because they 
showed us with a light. They had hand lights 
with them, and it looked like to be the top of a 



H. SICKLES 11 

desk. They lifted that off of us and they moved 
some other debris, and I was able to get up. 

Then they helped Roger out. They told 
me just get out of the building, and I went back 
up towards West Street. I didn't go into the 
building. I told them they were coming to West 
Street, and they went into the building further. 
They figured they would come out on what would be 
North Road or -- I think it's North End, the back 
end of the building. They figured they would 
come out on North End and it would be safer. 

I went out straight. I got out of the 
building, and you couldn't walk. There was so 
much dirt, dust and debris, it looked like it was 
snowing out. It was still falling, the ash. It 
was snowing. I couldn't believe what I saw. 
What was once a command post where there were 50 
people standing, there was nothing, there was 
nobody. It was quiet. The area was dead. There 
was no noise, no noise, nobody around, nothing. 
You couldn't hear anything. 

There was a communications van from the 
Fire Department, an old Chevy van, a low top, not 
one of the big rescue looking communications 



H. SICKLES 12 

vehicles, and it was just dead. There was no 
noise coming out of it, nothing. Everything 
inside was gray. Everything was covered. There 
was just nothing. There was no noise. There was 
no noise on the EMS radio. There was nothing. 
It was just dead silence. 

I got my wits about myself, and I tried 
to remember where everybody was . And then I was 
trying to call people on the radio and there was 
no response. 

A few minutes later Chief Ganci came 
walking up the street and he told me to go north. 
I said, "Where are you going?" He said, "I'm 
going south" I told him to go north, and he just 
continued south. He said, "Just go north." 

I stood there for a couple more 
minutes. I had to sort of get my wits about me. 
I started calling people on the radio. I got 
Bobby Brown on the radio, Chief Brown on the 
radio, and he was telling me that he's okay, he's 
not injured badly. The building collapsed around 
him. They're trying to figure out where they 
were. I told him to go south. 

I got a hold of Bruce Medjuck, and he 



H. SICKLES 13 

said he was okay. I couldn't get anybody else. 

Goldfarb came up on the radio and asked 
what was going on. I said to him, "There's 
nobody at the command post. It's just me. I 
don't know where anybody is or whether anybody 
survived," because I didn't know what went on 
inside the basement of that garage. 

I got onto Manhattan south, because we 
already had the frequency. I told him we had a 
major collapse and they need to start sending 
more units; send south through the Brooklyn 
Battery Tunnel and send north units from the 
bridge and they really shouldn't go past Chambers 
until they get here. I told them twice, twice, 
because the devastation is just unbelievable. 

Before I got anywhere, I was walking up 
West Street. I just wanted to get out of there 
at that certain point. I was walking towards 
Goldfarb at Chambers. Before I could even get 
far, the second building came down. I know when 
I walked up West Street just a little bit, maybe 
just past what would have been Vesey, I really 
didn't get that much further. The second 
building came down, and I was pushed. I actually 



H. SICKLES 14 

flew like 40 feet. 

I was covered in debris a second 
time -- oh, no, before that happened I saw one of 
my EMTs, Pat Richiusa. I saw him on the street, 
and he told me his partner was missing. I said, 
"Go west. Just go north and let's get out of 
here and we'll find her. We'll find where 
everybody is." And he disappeared. 

Then I went up West Street. The second 
collapse happened. I was knocked down. I was 
covered in debris again. Again, dark, very 
scared. Again, no flashlight with me whatsoever. 
I waited. I just sat there. I got up after the 
debris, and I started going north. I went north. 
I got up a couple of blocks, maybe just past 
Vesey, and I went towards the water. 

I saw Chief Carrasquillo there, and we 
went into the Renaissance Hotel. We set up a 
treatment area. Chief Gombo was in there, Chief 
Carrasquillo. Chief Pascale was wheezing away. 
Chief Kowalczyk I believe was there. We were 
just trying to put things together. 

I even yelled at Chief Gombo because 
nobody was listening. I knew Bobby Brown was 



H. SICKLES 15 

injured. I knew where he was, and we couldn't 
find him. I knew where Bruce Medjuck was prior 
to the collapses, and we couldn't find him. 
Nobody could tell me that they found them. 

We were operating in there. Chief 
Cassano was there. We had to put him on a back 
board. We sent him off to the hospital because 
we had neck and back pain. We must have sent 
about six or eight people to the hospital from 
that point. 

Then we had to evacuate because they 
said there was a major gas leak in the area. We 
went to the water side. We went up to river end. 
We walked up to River Terrace up here somewhere, 
probably closer to Chambers. There's a nursing 
home over here or a senior residence. We went to 
use that. We couldn't use it logistically . 

We went into the school. They started 
operating in Stuyvesant High School, so it was 
around Chambers. I guess it was closer to Warren 
than Chambers, the nursing home, north terrace or 
River Terrace, and we had to leave there. 
Actually I think it was North End, because then 
we went to River Terrace, and we had to leave 



H. SICKLES 16 

there . 

Chief Carrasquillo, Chief Pascale, they 
just went north. They went as far as the piers, 
and that's how we ended up taking the piers for 
the operation. 

I went up to Chambers, and from 
Chambers and West, Chief Peruggia was there. I 
ended up in the command post with Chief Peruggia, 
Chief Cruthers, and I forget the other Citywide 
Tour Commander. Butler, Chief Butler. I worked 
in the command post with them. 

It was eerie because they looked like 
they got mad at me. When they were talking about 
what assets they would need because they were 
going to go into an OEM meeting at Police 
Academy -- they were sending another chief down 
there to go and let them know what our concerns 
were . 

They were talking about rescue tools 
and rescue operations and DMAT teams. I said 
with a very straight face, "You need to order 
DMORT also. What's DMORT? Disaster mortuary 
response team. " They looked at me like I had two 
heads . 



H. SICKLES 17 

I turned and I looked behind me, and I 
said, "You really need this DMORT team here. 
It's going to be more than we can handle." It 
took a couple of seconds, and then Cruthers and 
Butler agreed. They both told this guy, "Get 
that DMORT thing also." 

It was eerie because I don't know if 
they didn't want to believe it, but it was very 
hard because they're theory is everybody is 
always alive until proven otherwise. You just 
didn't need any proof that there were going to be 
people dead there, just knowing the devastation. 
Operations sort of commenced. 

Then there was the funny things that 
happened by history. They didn't have any 
command board of sorts. They took a white car, 
like a fire safety car they use, the fire 
education car, the little Chevys or the little 
Fords. They wiped off the hood of the car, and 
the guy had a grease pencil and, lo and behold, 
the hood of the car became the command post. 

So wherever the hood is now -- I don't 
know where it is now, but you have to get that 
hood for the archive. I'm sure it was washed off 



H. SICKLES 18 

by now. But they used the hood of the car, and 
that was the command post for hours upon hours. 

When we actually moved down towards 
Vesey Street, they drove the car down towards 
Vesey Street and they used it as the command 
post. It was a command board. There's a little 
joke out of everything, but you have to have it. 
That's what we used, the hood of a car. So it's 
actually a pretty interesting thing. 

Later on, a couple of hours into this, 
Chief Peruggia turned white as a ghost. He grabs 
everybody and tells them that they found the 
Commissioner and they found Chief Ganci and they 
were both killed. We couldn't get body bags. We 
were talking to corrections, and we kept telling 
them where to bring the bags. Not hard. 

You couldn't understand why they 
couldn't figure out where it was, because there 
was no street. There were no street signs. 
There were no markings . The bridge took 
everything down, the walkway. Apparently he was 
near the walkway. I never saw him. I never got 
down there until much later on that evening. You 
couldn't do it. You just couldn't get around. 



H. SICKLES 19 

That night I walked around with one of 
the chiefs. I think it may have been Chief 
Butler. We went a couple of blocks in every 
direction, and you couldn't believe the 
devastation: big fire trucks crushed, ambulances 
crushed, vehicles crushed. The amount of 
devastation was just unbelievable. 

We had a fire marshal with us and they 
were marking stuff where they saw it on a map and 
trying to writing down where things were, and you 
just couldn't believe where things were and what 
they looked like. 

We went up to the third floor of the 
World Financial Center, and we had a command post 
there the first night. We were looking out over 
it, and it was amazing to see these big backhoe 
vehicles coming in to move things. You watch 
them at construction sites. But to pick up a 
step van that used to be a hazmat support unit, 
pick it up and just drop it off to the side; pick 
up what was an old EMS Chevy -- they're white and 
gold now -- pick up the Chevy and just drop it 
into a container truck, into a container, a 
garbage container. 



H. SICKLES 20 

It was amazing, the devastation that 
was there. Rescue trucks just covered. You knew 
that all these people were gone. Sitting in the 
corner of the room, the back corner, were two 
firemen. I don't know if one was an officer or 
not but there were two firemen calling companies 
and just trying to figure out who was missing and 
who was not missing, a list. They must have had 
like 500 names in the beginning. It was just 
unbelievable . 

I was collecting names of missing EMS 
people. I was just writing off the names that 
this kid had written on a list because he was 
told to give it to me. Chief Carrasquillo, Chief 
Gombo, my name was on the list, Chief Kowalczyk. 
Chief Peruggia's name was on the list. Bruce 
Medjuck's name was on the list. Karen Deshore's 
name was on the list. Roger Moore's name was on 
the list. 

Nobody knew where these people were. 
The list was long. There had to be 30 names on 
the list that he read off to me. I'm scratching 
off the names, and I realize I'm Captain Sickles. 
I wrote my own name. The guy said, "No, no, no. 



H. SICKLES 21 

Captain Sickles is a big fat guy. I met him once 
before." "No, no, it's me. Thank you." 

It was comical at one point, but I knew 
where most of these people were gone already. I 
knew Chief Gombo. He went up to OEM. Chief 
Carrasquillo was standing there. Chief Peruggia 
was standing there. Chief Pascale, they made her 
stay up north because she was wheezing away, but 
she was around. Chief Kowalczyk was around. We 
didn't know where Karen Deshore was for a long 
time. We didn't know where Bruce Medjuck was for 
a long time. We didn't know where a lot of 
people were for a long time. 

Chief McCracken's name was on this list 
also. We didn't know where he was for a long 
time, and he showed up. As a matter of fact, as 
I was writing the list, maybe five minutes later 
he came walking up the block. Scratched his name 
off the list. 

Then the list got smaller and smaller 
and smaller. Nobody knew who was on the New York 
Hospital ambulance, but we knew they were 
missing. Two from Cabrini were missing. Carlos 
Lillo, we had his partner. We didn't know where 



H. SICKLES 22 

he was. We had Quinn's partner. We didn't know 
where he was . 

The list, very early on we were 
actually able to narrow it down to like ten 
names . Then we found out Karen went to New 
Jersey and Roger was in New Jersey somewhere, so 
we were able to get them off. 

We whittled it down to -- we didn't 
have on that list the person from Hunter or the 
person from metro care that was from Albert 
Einstein. We didn't have them on the list. We 
didn't know about them. The Hunter guy, they're 
just not in our system. We have no way of 
tracking them. 

The Albert Einstein person, I didn't 
know about that -- I wasn't doing it anymore when 
we found out. We were trying to do patient 
tracking. There was no patient tracking. It was 
very annoying. You called communications, and 
you just got put on hold, they couldn't help you, 
no one could do anything. 

I know hundreds and hundreds of 
patients went to hospital, but we had no patient 
tracking, we had no victim tracking. So we had 



H. SICKLES 23 

to start sending -- from the command post we sent 
what supervisors were available to area 
hospitals, and fire marshals, just tracking down 
firemen and EMS personnel and police officers, 
and that was their goal. 

The command post wasn't worried about 
civilians. We couldn't track them all. There 
were just thousands of people. But they wanted 
to find out so they could identify who was 
missing from public safety. It was tough. 

So that information was hard getting it 
back and forth. There was lack of communication, 
but because radios were down. The Fire 
Department communications vehicle was down by 
City Hall originally because it couldn't get 
closer. It died. We had no command post 
vehicle. We couldn't get one in. We couldn't 
get an operational one. So they got that up and 
running, and that showed up much later on in the 
event . 

It was just hard. Anything that you 
tried to do, it was just very hard. Things 
weren't going smoothly. Things weren't going the 
way they should go. It was very hard getting 



H. SICKLES 24 

people up and operational. Everyone had concerns 
about everything. They were just wanting to call 
for 30 seconds. It was very, very hard. 

Some things were annoying. One guy 
walks up and says, "I have to go home. I 
volunteered for my community tours for the month. 
I don't have to stay all the time here. I want 
to go home now." I just looked at him and I 
said, "And?" 

I couldn't believe what was coming out 
of some people's mouths. It was just amazing. 
The personal toll it had on me, I don't know. I 
don't know if I was the last one to see this poor 
guy Chief Ganci was alive. How do you tell his 
wife that your husband died a hero, trying to get 
everybody to safety? 

He was with Commissioner Feehan toward 
the end. Why the two of them didn't go off to a 
command post and try at the first collapse try to 
put this back together and try to put 
organization together, the first thing this guy 
thought of was to walk further south, trying to 
get people to safety and figure out what was 
going on. 



H. SICKLES 



25 



I saw him -- I don't know what was 
going through his mind, but it was perceived as 
he was just looking to get people to a safe area. 
How do you tell that to somebody? People don't 
understand that. I think I'm the last one to see 
this poor guy alive, and he was killed. ^^^^| 

I don't know the condition of Chief 
Ganci, but I understand he was pretty much in the 
same condition. 

It's just amazing the amount of 
devastation. When you look at this day after 
day, it's amazing. I don't know what else to 
say. 

Later on my missing personnel -- I told 
you earlier I saw Pat on the street and he told 
me his partner was missing. When we got to the 
River Terrace, she was standing there. 
Everybody's gray because they were all covered in 
soot. She was clean. She was clean. She was 
absolutely clean. That was striking. 

Walking up Vesey when we went to the 
North End when we went to the Renaissance Hotel, 
I saw my command car. The vehicle next to it was 
no windows, no nothing. I said, "Dan --" my car 



H. SICKLES 



26 



was clean. There was dust. The vehicles on the 
other side of it, nothing, clean. I couldn't 
understand. Was there a wall that just stopped 
it? 

It was just pretty funny. You walk up 
and you -- and that's why my car was stolen. 
What's his name, 

was there for 24 hours. I want to go home. I 
have no way of getting home. 

Oh, 844 is up at staging. 



I was on site for 25 hours. I had to 
see this devastation, what was going on. When 
you walk away, there were some funny stories. 
But this girl was absolutely clean. Laura was 
clean] She clung to 

me. I couldn't get her off of me. I put her in 
an ambulance, a Cabrini truck, I think it was, 



H. SICKLES 27 

and I sent her to the piers further north. 

At a later point I actually hooked 
up -- when I had a chance to call the station, 
the first thing I said is "Have we heard from 
Richiusa or Seibert? Did they get back 
together?" "They're here. They're together. 
The truck has a broken window." "I don't give a 
flip about the truck. Are they alive?" "Pat has 
a knee injury. He's cut up, but he's okay." All 
right. That was it. 

I was happy. I didn't lose anybody 
from here. Everybody got out safe. A lot of my 
people showed up. There was one of my guys that 
was on jury duty, Smith. I turned around, and I 
don't know what time he arrived there -- we were 
at the command post -- and there he is in 
uniform. "I'm here, Cap, ready to help out. 
What have you got for me?" "Aren't you on jury 
duty?" "I got canceled" "Oh, good." That's how 
he found out about this; he was in the car on the 
way home . 

It's just amazing what goes through 
your head when you were there: "Why are you 
here? You're on jury duty." It was amazing. 



H. SICKLES 28 

I'm standing here looking at this map, 
and it's not here anymore. It's just not there. 
It's just amazing. 

Unless you have anything else. That 
was it. This was the first two or three hours 
that I was there. 

Q. I just need to make some notes on the 
map itself. When you went into Manhattan after 
the first crash, once you got closer downtown, do 
you remember what route you took to actually get 
down to the incident? 

A. I think we came across Chambers. I 
think Vesey was the first staging area. I don't 
remember if Vesey was the first staging area. I 
don't remember if Chambers-- it had to be Vesey. 
Where's Stuyvesant High School? 

Q. Stuyvesant is off the map. 

A. Stuyvesant is up here by Chambers? 

Q. Further north, yeah. 

A. So the first staging area was up by 
Chambers. When I arrived I walked from Chambers 
down to the Trade Center. No, where is the 
Renaissance Hotel? The Renaissance Hotel is off 
of Vesey. The Renaissance Hotel is off of Vesey. 



H. SICKLES 29 

Q. Yeah, Vesey and North End. 

A. The first staging -- 

Q. The movie theater? 

A. Right. The first staging was somewhere 
around Vesey. Here's the Renaissance Hotel. The 
first staging was somewhere around Vesey. Howie 
Hahn dropped me off at Vesey and West, and I 
walked up to the north tower, where I met Chief 
Gombo. Then we went across the street, which 
would be Two World Financial Center, and we 
evacuated that. So I was over there. 

Arriving on the scene we came down 
Chambers to Vesey. That's how we arrived on the 
scene. We came out of the Midtown Tunnel, we 
came downtown, we zigzagged a little bit around 
traffic, and we came across Chambers. 

Q. Okay. Do you remember the second plane 
striking the tower? 

A. I don't know if we were on the scene. 
I believe that's when we were inside this tower, 
and that's when we evacuated this tower and went 
outside . 

Q. And Lieutenant Medjuck and Captain 
Olszewski? 



H. SICKLES 30 

A. They were on Vesey. I don't know if 
they were over here by Vesey and West. 

Q. This is actually West Broadway. 

A. West Broadway. I don't know if they 
were by West Broadway or they were by Church, but 
they were in this neighborhood. 

Q. Right. 

A. I tend to believe they were closer to 
West Broadway than Church. Actually I left it at 
home. I have all my notes from the first day and 
the days coming. I have it in one reporter pad. 
I left it home by accident. They were over here. 
They were on Vesey in this neighborhood. 

Q. Okay. Any other thoughts or opinions, 
comments? 

A. No. 

MR. RADENBERG: The time is now 0557, 

and the interview is concluded. 



File No. 9110190 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMT JEFFREY WARNER 
Interview Date: November 2, 2001 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



J. WARNER 2 

MR. RADENBERG: Today is November 2nd, 
2001. The time is now 0745 hours. I'm Paul 
Radenberg of the Fire Department, City of 
New York. I am conducting an interview 
with -- 

EMT WARNER: EMT Jeffrey Warner, badge 
number 2933, Battalion 45, Queens. 

MR. RADENBERG: This interview is being 
conducted at EMS Battalion 45 and is 
regarding the events of September 11th, 
2001. 

Q. Jeffrey, if you would please start from 
when you were assigned to the job. 

A. We were assigned the call 10:11 a.m., 
and we responded from north Queens over the 59th 
Street Bridge. We went over the 59th Street 
Bridge. My partner was driving. I was in the 
passenger seat. We came down Broadway. 
Somewhere on Broadway we picked up an auxiliary 
fireman. He jumped in the back. We proceeded 
down to the corner of Murray Street and West 
Broadway. 

At Murray Street and West Broadway, we 
believe that's when the second collapse occurred. 



J. WARNER 3 

The amount of dust in the air became a lot more 
thick. We heard of course a loud rumble. We 
didn't see it collapse; we just heard it. From 
discussion and the time line, it pretty much 
seems after the second collapse occurred. 

We weren't able to safely drive the 
vehicle any further because of the dust in the 
air. There were burnt pieces of paper falling 
all over the place like a ticker tape parade. 

We loaded up our stretcher like we 
would for any kind of standby, and we just 
started making our way as far as we could down 
Murray Street. We made a left on West Broadway 
Street, where we eventually came to Barclay 
Street . 

At Barclay Street, which now I'm told 
the building that we came upon was number Seven 
World Trade Center, we noticed that there were 
people trapped who were unable to get out at that 
time or unaware of how to get out -- I'm not sure 
I want to use the word "trapped" -- on what 
appeared to be the eighth floor from the outside. 

Myself, my partner, an off-duty fire 
lieutenant, somebody from OEM, who was also with 



J. WARNER 4 

the Port Authority, and a female police 
lieutenant made numerous attempts to get into the 
building from the parking area. We finally found 
a door that was somewhat open on the Barclay 
Street side near the parking garage where there 
was a regular door. 

We entered the building. There was 
some kind of an emergency escape ladder in the 
parking garage that went up. Myself and the 
off-duty fire lieutenant went up the ladder, and 
we were met maybe a story or two up with a 
Plexiglas trapdoor that was padlocked. 

The fire lieutenant told me that it was 
padlocked, and I remember that the OEM guy had a 
Halligan tool. I told the boss I was going back 
on the ladder to get the Halligan tool and I was 
going to bring it up to him. 

He made numerous attempts to try and 
open the lock; it failed. We were alerted to 
evacuate the building by Lieutenant Scullion and 
Lieutenant Frazier of the former ERS . 

We came out of the building, and we 
gathered all our equipment. We were met with -- 
we had already been with but we had more 



J. WARNER 5 

equipment that was brought over to us by the 
carpenters union. 

We left the building. My partner and I 
went to get our vehicle. We got our vehicle back 
down eventually to where our equipment was, 
loaded everything up, left the area and went over 
to Chambers and West Street. There was an EMS 
staging area set up there. 

Everything seemed to be organized from 
then on. We spent most of the afternoon parked 
over there. 

Q. Who was your partner that day? 

A. Nicole Ferrell. 

Q. Nicole Ferrell? 

A. Nicole Ferrelo, F-E-R-R-E-L-L . 

Q. The equipment that the carpenters 
brought over -- 

A. Yes. 

Q. -- what kind of stuff did they bring 
over? 

A. The carpenters brought over lots of 
jugs of spring water from spring water machines. 
It was a self- contained suffocating breathing 
apparatus, but it wasn't a Scott pack. I think 



J. WARNER 6 

was like made by MSA or something. They had like 
really old, long cylinders of oxygen. I think 
they may have had one of those MASH-style 
stretchers, the folding stretchers. 

The corner where we had left our 
equipment initially was where they started 
putting more equipment. It almost became like a 
small depot, but it wasn't -- it only remained 
that way like 45 minutes, because we ended up 
taking all our equipment and heading over to that 
staging area on Chambers and West Street. 

Q. From the time you arrived on scene in 
the area other Broadway and Murray until you met 
up with Lieutenant Scullion and Lieutenant 
Frazier, any encounters with any other EMS 
personnel or officers? 

A. Yeah, there was the off-duty MOS . He 
said he lived in Jersey. He came over in his own 
vehicle. He had like a non-issue tech bag, but 
he had a uniform on and a coat on and a helmet 
on. He was the one who gave me the cartridges 
for my mask that I had gotten from the Port 
Authority van when we arrived down there. 

Q. Do you know who he was? 



J. WARNER 7 

A. No. I think he was either from 
Battalion 4 or Battalion 8. He had a goatee, in 
his like late twenties, early thirties, really 
nice guy. We had a couple interactions with him. 
He was just there to help. He worked there 
without a unit. 

We had seen that one guy who was 
assigned to OEM that worked for EMS and telling 
him where we were coming from. He was in 
civilian clothes. There was the one paramedic 
that started getting real bossy. I'm not even 
sure what his name was. I know there was that 
one EMT or medic dressed like a lieutenant, but 
he started giving orders and we realized he was 
only one of us. We're like, you know -- 

As far as interaction down there, more 
civilians or guys from the unions, electrical 
workers, carpenters. And off-duty firefighters 
were down there. 

Q. Any patients, walking wounded, anything 
like that that you encountered? 

A. Initially when we arrived down there, 
my partner treated a guy with either an arm or a 
shoulder injury. She gave him a sling and a 



J. WARNER 8 

shot, and he ended up just running away. 

Q. Sorry, that was -- 

A. Yeah, that was outside. I failed to 
mention that. That was initially when we 
initially arrived on Broadway and Murray. I 
wasn't even aware of that until afterwards 
because I hadn't known my partner had done that 
until I saw the in the newspaper. 

Like I said, I was loading up the 
stretcher with equipment. I guess she just sat 
him down on the back bumper and treated him, and 
he just kept going north. Like I said, there was 
a huge exodus of people just going up north. 
We encountered some reporters and 
stuff. We were very careful about what we said 
to them. We weren't even really sure who we were 
talking to. We were like, "Yeah, we're from 
EMS," and just left it at that. 

That was really it until we got over to 
Chambers and West Street until we saw more EMS 
workers later on that day. 

Q. Any thoughts or comments or opinions on 
what happened that you would like to add? 

A. No, just -- when we got over to 



J. WARNER 9 

Chambers and West Street, that's when it seemed 
like things started to get really organized. You 
really couldn't get on the radio at all. Every 
radio was jammed up. It was impossible to talk 
on the radio. Communication was zilch. I think 
a lot of people got on the radio and they just 
kept talking and talking. 

Other than that, organizationally until 
later on that day when the boss knew who we were, 
what we were doing there, and got us all in the 
staging area by BMCC. That was really it as far 
as being down in this area right here by Seven 
World Trade Center. As far as that's concerned, 
we were kind of on our own down there. 
That's really it. 

Q. Okay. I thank you. 

MR. RADENBERG: The time is now 0755 

hours, and the interview is concluded. 



File No. 9110192 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

CAPTAIN KARIN DESHORE 

Interview Date: November 7, 2001 



Transcribed by Elisabeth F. Nason 



K. DESHORE 

INVESTIGATOR TAMBASCO: Today is November 7. 
I'm Mike Tambasco with the World Trade Center Task 
Force. We are doing an interview with Captain 
Karin Deshore of Battalion 46 into the events of 
September 11 at the World Trade Center. Interview 
time is beginning at 0549 a.m. 

Q. Captain, would you be good enough to tell us 
your story? 

A. Okay, on 9-11-01 I reported for duty as 
usual, at 0500 hours. Lieutenant Spiro Yioras was sent 
from Battalion 49 to be Conditions 46. He arrived here 
roughly around 0615 hours. Mr. Keller, who became part 
of the persons responding with me, arrived for duty at 
0630 hours. I don't know the exact time, but I was 
sitting behind my desk when Mr. Keller came into my 
office and told me that an airplane had just hit the 
World Trade Center. 

Because Mr. Keller is a prankster, I told him 
to leave me alone, and get out of my office. Then he 
said to me it was really true. I looked at his face. 
I got up and sure enough there was smoke coming out of 
the World Trade Center building. We had the television 
in our lunchroom. 

Thinking it was a possibly accident of a 



K. DESHORE 

Cessna or something hitting the World Trade Center, I 
did become concerned, but at that time I didn't have a 
command car. I didn't respond. When it became 
apparent that a commercial airliner had hit the World 
Trade Center, the first hit, I called Lieutenant Yioras 
in from patrol. He came here and another one of my 
employees, Mr. Prue, also called and asked did I want 
him to come in, since he lived right around the corner 
and I advised him, come on in. When Lieutenant Yioras 
arrived, Lieutenant Yioras, myself and Mister EMT 
Keller, who is here on restricted duty, but I still 
felt he could respond with me, if it was just as a 
matter of being my aide or carrier or assist and Mr. 
Prue responded in command car 825. 

It is my recollection that we drove Northern 
Boulevard to the 59 Street bridge. At the beginning of 
the 59 Street bridge, the second airliner hit and we 
witnessed it. Mr. Keller later on told me that we were 
still at the office here, but I remember it hitting 
when we just hit the 59 Street bridge on the Queens 
side. People were just standing on the 59 Street 
bridge in total disbelief. No traffic was moving. 
Traffic agents were trying to clear the way to get us 
over the bridge. We could see the smoke coming out of 



K. DESHORE 

the buildings, explosions, you know, dark smoke coming 
out of both buildings. 

We made it over the 59 Street bridge, made a 
left on Second Avenue and we took the rear end of a 
caravan of police vehicles, Fire Department vehicles, 
black cars with sirens and we just followed them, 
because there was just no other openings. People were 
standing everywhere on Second Avenue and just looking, 
because you couldn't see the twin towers, but you could 
see the smoke coming, you know, above the area. 

I was not driving, Lieutenant Yioras was 
driving and somewhere we made a right turn. In the 
meantime, I notified communication, was told to switch 
to Citywide, which we did, and I told him who was all 
responding and I was advised that I was cleared to 
respond even prior to that, because we also heard EMS 
employees on the air advising that they were on the 
scene of the locations and there were no supervisors 
and they didn't know what to do, where to go or who to 
await . 

So they were told by communications to go to 
various staging areas. We were told to go to West and 
Vesey. I have no idea where West and Vesey is and we 
just kept following the caravan of emergency vehicles. 



K. DESHORE 

We arrived on the west side and I believe it was West 
and Vesey. We couldn't go any further. It was in 
front of -- just prior to one of the twin towers, and I 
believe it is number 1 twin tower. All right. 

Just as we got there, Chief Charlie Wells was 
there trying to set up an area with all of the 
ambulance crews that were just standing there and 
really didn't have anybody to give them any 
directions. He saw Lieutenant Yioras and myself and he 
basically asked us to keep in touch with him and be 
part of his contingency. 

Most of the individuals that were there were 
Hatzolah volunteers, maybe 3 and 4 to a bus. I had one 
Flushing paramedic unit and I remember it was Al Touro 
on the paramedic unit. We also had a student that was 
his first day riding as a paramedic student. He, of 
course, had no helmet. I had another BLS unit from 
Flushing. I don't know their radio designation, but 
the two ladies ' names are Jen and Bonnie and I really 
didn't know that they were ladies either. 

Later on I found out a react unit and one of 
the gentlemen was Orlando Rivera I believe. They were 
told basically to respond with myself and Chief Wells 
to the further part of the World Trade Center 



K. DESHORE 

buildings, the southwest corner of building number 2. 

I left Lieutenant Yioras in charge of all the 
ambulances . He was to collect the keys and as the 
units would get patients, they would come back to him, 
get the keys and then respond to a hospital and then 
come back to him or whatever they were told to do. I 
was with Mr. Keller and Mr. Prue. This is funny, but 
Mr. Keller told me that I looked like an ass and I told 
him it was really unprofessional for him to say that. 
I said to him why would you say that. He said to me I 
had my helmet on backwards . So I put my helmet on the 
right way. Apparently I was a little excited at that 
time, because I was trying to get everybody as close to 
the west side as I could because of the falling debris 
and the bodies kept coming down. 

I spoke with paramedic Charl from Flushing 
and I said to him did you see that, he said what. I 
said just look up to your left. Here the bodies kept 
coming out of both buildings. Some of them were on 
fire. Some of them were moving, others were not moving 
and the worst part was as they hit the ground, they 
would go like a splush sound. You could just see the 
whole body would just disintegrate into pieces and 
splatter all over and the sound and I saw a couple of 



K. DESHORE 

them do that, was just enough to just make me tune out 
to that. 

I became more concerned with everybody in my 
contingency not getting hit by falling debris. I had 
the rear. Chief Wells had the front and all the 
volunteers were in the back. I was trying to keep them 
moving and trying to move left, because once I got them 
out from underneath the buildings, they weren't getting 
hit by bodies, but the debris just kept coming out, and 
the billowing smoke and as people kept pouring out of 
the buildings, there was total chaos. They were coming 
in our direction and before we could do anything for 
them, they would turn and they would go back in. 

There was no organization, anybody saying 
hey, just keep going in this direction. People just 
would not listen to any kind of advice, suggestion or 
demand you made of them to keep them safe. My concern 
at that time was basically all of the volunteers that I 
had who had no helmets . So as we got over to the 
furthest end of the World Trade Center building, which 
was now building number 2, the southwest corner, Chief 
Wells said to me Karin, give me one unit to go in with 
me. Go on the command frequency and when I need 
another unit, I will call you. Then you know that the 



K. DESHORE 

other unit has a patient and gone back to their bus, 
which at that time I felt saved a lot of lives instead 
of us just all go into the building. His decision was 
an extremely wise choice. 

I didn't know that the two people I chose 
were two ladies, they were Jen and Bonnie, because they 
were the only ones with helmet. In the meantime I am 
yelling to get everybody else underneath a pedestrian 
overpass over the street, because again they had no 
helmets and the debris, there was no longer danger of 
them getting hit by bodies, but the debris was just 
coming down. It was unbelievable. 

Charlie Wells, my last recollection of him 
was going towards the building and Bonnie and Jen. I 
told them to follow Chief Wells with their helmet on, 
but they didn't have a long board so I said to -- later 
on I found out they were ladies. Don't you think you 
should take a long board with you and they didn't have 
one. Somebody went and grabbed a long board from 
someplace and they had their stretcher up, they laid it 
on the side of the stretcher. 

As they are walking now they are tripping on 
the straps, so I told them -- again, I told them this 
is not right. You are going to fall and hurt 



K. DESHORE 

yourself. You won't be able to help anybody and they 
took the long board and put it on top. My last 
recollection was of them going towards the building. 

I asked at that time -- everybody else was 
with me still and I kept pushing them back and back and 
back, because I said what is this, a subway at the end 
of the overpass, because there is fire coming out of 
the ground. I didn't realize that that was a car 
already on fire over there. 

All the ambulances were parked right there in 
front of me also, underneath the overpass, just neatly 
parked towards the buildings, all of them. There must 
have been at least two rows of ambulances, maybe 10 of 
them. Of course cars parked everywhere else. 

Apparently, my last recollection like I said, 
was Chief Wells and the two ladies going towards the 
building. I didn't know that Chief Wells made it out 
of the building and apparently my delaying their 
entering the building, Jen and Bonnie, might have saved 
them all, because they also survived. My back was 
towards the building, trying to push everybody up. 
Grassy hill was there and up underneath that overpass, 
when somebody just simply shouted and I have no idea 
who it was, it's blowing. 



10 
K. DESHORE 



I had no clue what was going on. I never 
turned around because a sound came from somewhere that 
I never heard before. Some people compared it with an 
airplane. It was the worst sound of a rolling sound, 
not a thunder. I can't explain it, what it was. All I 
know is -- and a force started to come hit me in my 
back. I can't explain it. You had to be there. All I 
know is I had to run because I thought there was an 
explosion . 

I ran about 10, 12 feet up this little grassy 
hill and by then this force and this sound caught up 
with me already. I threw myself behind the last 
support column of the pedestrian overpass. It became 
pitch dark. The sound got worse, the force just kept 
passing me. At times I thought it was like an orange 
light maybe, coming past me. 

I was unaware what was happening. I thought 
it was just a major explosion. I didn't know the 
building was collapsing. I was sitting with my left 
side towards the support beam, total darkness, total 
noise. I felt beyond alone. I felt desolated. I felt 
like, all I could say was people think about their 
families and whatever. All I kept saying to myself 
within me I don't want to die, I don't want to die, I 



11 

K. DESHORE 



don't want to die. 

I can't tell you how long it was before it 
died down. I just felt like the darkness the 
loneliness and being alone was the worst thing I ever 
experienced in my life and not being able to breathe. 
There was no air. Whatever this explosion was simply 
sucked all the oxygen out of the air. You couldn't 
breathe and the feeling of suffocation, I can't explain 
no further on that. 

I don't know how long it took. All of a 
sudden it was all over and the silence set in. Nobody 
cried, nobody talked, nobody made a sound. There was 
nothing. Absolutely nothing. You could open your 
eyes, it was pitch black. Breathing became a little 
bit easier but I just sat there. I didn't know what 
was happening and I just sat there. Again, I can't 
give you time periods, 5 minutes, 5 seconds or however 
long it might have been. 

Somehow over my right shoulder I hear this 
male voice, "is there anybody out there." I didn't 
know at first should I answer, should I not answer. 
Then I just said I'm over here, please don't leave me. 
The man said I'm over here, I can't see. That's when I 
opened my eyes. I said I can't see either. He said 



12 
K. DESHORE 



okay I'm going to talk. I said I'm going to talk and 
we will find each other. That's exactly what we did. 
We found each other. We kept talking to each other. 
We found each other. Nobody else answered, nobody else 
said a word. I was unaware that there were people from 
my unit laying all around me. They described it later 
on where they were. 

I had a police van in front of me, about 6 
feet that I remember being there. I saw a picture 
later on, it was totally destroyed. Two feet to my 
right there was an overturned car, which I saw later on 
the pictures also. I had steel beams all around me. 

Like I said I found this gentleman and we 
held onto each other like little kids. By then we were 
coughing, vomiting, spitting. It was just -- we were 
trying to breathe. It was total darkness. We couldn't 
see anything behind us at all. We found about 5 or 6 
more people and we held onto each other. Like little 
kids, we walked, as I found out later on, towards the 
water. Since I didn't know any of the location I 
didn't know there was a marina. We just walked in a 
direction where we could walk. We held onto each 
other. We were all coughing, vomiting. Some of us 
fell down. We would pick each other up. There might 



13 
K. DESHORE 



have been 6, 7, 8 of us by now. There were dead bodies 
laying everywhere, obvious signs of death. 

I had no ambulances. I had no medical 
equipment. We had nothing, just the way we were, 
that's what we had. Towards our -- as we kept walking 
down a street, I have no idea what street it was, 
halfway down that street, two ladies came out of a 
building. They brought us some water. We started to 
rinse our mouths out and we started to -- I at least, I 
know I irrigated my eyes because I had whatever it was 
in my eyes and that made it even worse. Now I 
apparently created mud in my eyes . As I was told later 
on, we had granulated cement and jet fuel mixture all 
over our uniforms and our bodies. 

It just got worse. We now picked up a 
fireman that was severely severely injured. I had some 
female police officers that had severe cuts and 
lacerations and people were just bleeding, by now maybe 
10 of us. We were just -- I didn't have any obvious 
signs of injuries that I could see on myself, but other 
people were bleeding. 

We went into this location of business where 
the ladies came out and found out it was a distribution 
place for napkins and table cloths for restaurants. We 



14 
K. DESHORE 



used their napkins to bandage people up. Somebody 
found a long board and we put the injured fireman on. 
He was severely injured, bleeding from the rear of his 
neck or occipital area in the back of his head. 

Police officers now came in. Again, maybe by 
now we were 12, thinking I was Fire Department and had 
the Fire Department helmet on, I was chosen to run the 
outfit there, because I kept telling them bring all the 
wounded in here that you can find. We started 
bandaging them up and so on. The officer said do you 
have any ambulances. I said I have nothing. We had no 
equipment whatsoever. 

Somebody apparently found some face masks and 
we attempted to put them on, but they hindered us from 
breathing even more and we just couldn't breathe. It 
became a little lighter out. By now it was grayish. 
The officer saw that there was a little marina. They 
went across there to try to get the boats that were 
docked there started and they couldn't. 

After I bandaged everybody up and everybody 
was sort of calm in the location. Like I said, maybe 
10, 12 people now. Now I also had two elderly females 
that were a part of that business there. So we had 
maybe 12 individuals. I went outside to see what I 



15 
K. DESHORE 



could do, when I saw the second building of the World 
Trade Center, still unbeknown to me the first one had 
collapsed. 

Somewhere around the middle of the World 
Trade Center, there was this orange and red flash 
coming out. Initially it was just one flash. Then 
this flash just kept popping all the way around the 
building and that building had started to explode. The 
popping sound, and with each popping sound it was 
initially an orange and then a red flash came out of 
the building and then it would just go all around the 
building on both sides as far as I could see. These 
popping sounds and the explosions were getting bigger, 
going both up and down and then all around the 
building . 

I went inside and I told everybody that the 
other building or there was an explosion occurring up 
there and I said I think we have another major 
explosion. I don't know if we are all going to be safe 
here. I told them I can't force you, but I don't know 
if we are going to be safe here. I'm going to try to 
get as far away from this building as possible. 
Unbeknown to me, a half a block down was the water. 

Now we are picking up this injured fireman. 



16 
K. DESHORE 



It took 4 to carry him. We are picking up all the 
injured. We took the two elderly ladies from the 
building with us and now 10, 12, of us, 14 of us, are 
going out of the building and further down, only to get 
down to the water. 

Down at the water was one EMS person. I saw 
his Fire Department uniform, with his hands over his 
ears, yelling I can't find my partner, has anybody seen 
my partner and he is just running back and forth. He 
wouldn't stand still long enough for me to even speak 
with him. I had another EMS person, later on I found 
out he is from Battalion 20, his name is Kemp, the last 
name is Kemp. There were two ladies there that 
apparently had been jogging up and down this East River 
or west river, whatever you want to call it, and they 
were in little jogging shorts, jogging in circles. You 
couldn't stop them. I tried to stop them. I tried to 
find out if they were injured or anything. I couldn't 
stop them. 

So here these explosions are getting bigger 
and louder and bigger and louder and I told everybody 
if this building totally explodes, still unaware that 
the other building had collapsed, I'm going in the 
water. I said I can swim. I'm taking somebody with me 



17 
K. DESHORE 



and hold them, because it was maybe a 6 foot drop. 

Just then, a small Jersey boat, it was Jersey 
police officers as I thought, entered this little 
marina. By then the darkness had turned to gray and 
there was light on the other side, but you couldn't 
make out that light. Maybe because my eyes were that 
bad I couldn't see that good, but there was light and 
the boat came in. I don't recall that I had to go down 
some stairs to get to that boat. I saw that later on 
when I went to visit the site about a month later. 

We went down, we carried everybody down. The 
elderly ladies got on. The fireman was put on board 
and the police officers and the EMS person, maybe 10, 
12, 14 people got on the boat. I had not got on the 
boat yet. There were 3 officers, two officers and one 
sergeant, what I thought was a sergeant. As I'm 
standing at the door to the boat, the sergeant yells at 
me and pardon me for my language, what the fuck are you 
going to do now. Are you going to come or not. I'm 
still standing there trying to figure out what my next 
move should be, when the same sergeant says fucking 
shit, it's coming at us, and that's a quote. 

Again, I didn't see what was happening behind 
me, but knowing of all the explosions I thought here 



K. DESHORE 

was another explosion coming and this sound again and 
this wave of this force again. I just jumped on the 
boat, closed the door with my left hand and just sank 
down to my knees. Here whatever it was just came right 
at us again. The sergeant is yelling at the one 
officer. The second officer was in the back with some 
of the people that had been in the back of the boat. I 
had no clue what was going on back there. The sergeant 
is yelling at the second officer, get the fuck out of 
here, get the fuck out of here. I'm sorry for using 
that word repeatedly. The poor guy behind the steering 
wheel is saying I can't go any place, we are tied on. 
That is about what saved our lives, because 
this force came at us and hit us with everything. The 
boat was attempting to overturn and it kept hitting in 
the back against the pier. Again, I was just -- by 
then I was resigned to die. I didn't mind dying 
because I was with other people, you know, and the guy 
behind the steering wheel just sank to his knee and the 
sergeant just stood at the other door. I have no clue 
how long that lasted. I was -- my back was towards it 
and as I'm sitting in this corner there I was just 
resigned, this is it, it can't happen to me a second 
time. We were -- this time was a difference. We were 



19 
K. DESHORE 



capable of breathing and I was with somebody. 

When again, I don't know how the window 
didn't get broken or how the boat wasn't overturned, 
nothing happened really, but when all of it quieted 
down again, the sergeant opened the door and he got out 
and he untied the boat and by the time this starched 
individual with the starched uniform came in, he was 
covered with everything. He told us this guy who 
-- officer who finally got off the floor, just get the 
fuck out of here now. He said I can't see where I'm 
going. He said just turn the boat to the left and 
every time you hit something turn it to the left and 
turn it to the left and turn it to the left till you 
get out in the open water and when you get out, just 
keep going. That's exactly what this officer did. 

As we finally got out of this small opening 
of that marina, you could see the light in New Jersey, 
because he apparently was by then was going in that 
direction. I got up from there because I appeared to 
be in the way. I got up from there and I went down 
into that small cabin that was down there and he was 
-- they apparently had taken, thrown the fireman and 
long board down into that cabin. The fireman had come 
off the long board and was just laying there. He was 



20 
K. DESHORE 



still bleeding profusely. 

I went down there and I straightened out his 
leg. The long board was laying half way going up the 
stairs and people were just sitting and hanging there 
and by then they had gotten back on to the top of the 
boat and the back. I straightened out his leg and -- 
sorry -- he had all the stuff coming out of his pockets 
and I said to him I'm going to empty out your pockets 
because you got -- they looked like hose connections, 
metal and everything in his pockets and his turnout 
coat and I took everything out and I threw it to my 
right. There was like a bench or an area there. I 
just threw it. He still had his helmet on. He was 
laying in his own blood and he says to me just I'm all 
right. My name is Bob. So I said to him my name is 
Karin and we just held hands. So we just held hands 
till we got over to Jersey. 

When we got over to Jersey they told me to 
get the hell out of the area and I said I can't get up 
right now. I just couldn't get up. I didn't have the 
strength to get up. They came and got Bob and they put 
him on the long board. I saw them turn him over to my 
side. They put the long board and the 4 of them got 
Bob up and I still couldn't get up. They came and they 



21 
K. DESHORE 



physically stood me up. I couldn't get up. I did walk 
up those about 3 stairs up and I got to the top of the 
boat and they weren't ready for us in Jersey. 

We were the first boat to get over there. 
There was nobody there. The cops kept yelling, there 
were cops there. The cops kept yelling, just give him 
your hand, give him your hand, put your foot up. I can 
hear all of this. I couldn't react. I know I didn't 
do it, but I could hear them. Somebody finally took my 
right hand and gave it to somebody and they took one of 
my legs and they put it up there and gave it to 
somebody. I mean they put it up and they pulled me up 
and they pushed me up. Then somebody came and just 
assisted me and they put some sheets over on the pier 
and they put me right there. I don't know what 
happened to anybody else. They started coming in, 
medical teams, and I don't know what happened to Bob. 

So we were just laying there and again they 
gave us water and they irrigated our eyes and it just 
made it worse. By then, we were vomiting. Some of us 
were vomiting blood and so on, but I appeared to be one 
of the better ones off, because they had triage tags 
and I started making out triage tags and putting it on 
everybody, just their names and Ladder company or 



22 
K. DESHORE 



Engine and EMS and civilians and I made triage tags up 
for everybody. 

Maybe 45 minutes to an hour later they got 
not ambulances, but some vans to take us to Jersey City 
medical center, 4 of us. When we got there they had 
just set up some kind of an auditorium or whatever. 
They took us into the auditorium and they proceeded to 
treat us with -- I got albuterol treatments and I got 
an injection. They got an ophthalmologist and they 
cleaned out my eyes and my ears were just, I don't 
know. I couldn't even hear any more, probably from all 
the noise. 

My problem was I refused to give up my 
helmet. I would not surrender my helmet because I 
didn't know when the next thing was going to come. 
Somebody dropped an oxygen tank and 4 of us hit the 
deck. I mean I just got out of that wheelchair and I 
threw my self on the ground looking for someplace to 
hide. I can remember that. 

But the most unbelievable thing is that when 
I looked down, my right foot had no sock on. I found 
my sock in my pocket. To the best of my recollection, 
as I child I was always told by my grandmother, if you 
ever have to jump in the water take your shoes and 



23 
K. DESHORE 



socks off because it will pull you down. I think in 
anticipation of jumping in the water I started taking 
my shoes and socks off and then saw the boat come and 
put my shoe back on. That's the best I can remember. 

After treatment, we were taken up to a 
conference room where they had gathered all fire, PD 
and EMS people. I saw some really traumatized 
individuals. By then, I had this only survivor 
syndrome. I hadn't heard, seen or anybody from my 
unit. My feeling of sending Charlie Wells and those 
two ladies into that building, because by then people 
said that both buildings had collapsed and I had 
figured that everybody was in there. It just took a 
total mental toll on me until maybe sometime in the 
afternoon, around 4, 5 o'clock Al Touro was brought in, 
the paramedic from Flushing. 

We saw each other and we just stood there and 
we hugged and we cried. We just cried. I had been 
unable to get any kind of message to my family because 
the phones were out. My husband works over at 
Battalion 47 in the Rockaways . The last transmission 
from me was that I had lost all of my people, that I 
was with individuals and I was trying to evacuate 
them. After that there was no more transmission. Even 



24 
K. DESHORE 



that apparently didn't get through to people. 

Lieutenant Gleeson here went to the command 
center here. He initially had me declared missing, 
then missing and possibly dead and then definitely 
confirmed passed away. That of course, reached my 
family and they had a very hard time trying to figure 
out what had happened. 

My husband left work that evening at 5 
o'clock after doing 12 hours tours. He immediately 
caused an accident and totalled the car. He had to be 
picked up by one of my children Danielle, and she 
brought him here and that was about 8:30, 9 o'clock 
that evening when I reached them for the first time and 
told them I was alive. 

By 10 o'clock that night a minister from 
Jersey got a bus from somewhere and because the city 
was closed down, we got an escort from the Jersey City 
police and we were all brought back to somewhere in New 
York where we wanted to go. I reached here at 10:30 
that night. That was for the first time my family 
really knew that I was all right. 

We were allowed to take showers at the 
medical center because by 1, 2:00 in the afternoon all 
that soot that was covering us had created a total rash 



25 
K. DESHORE 



situation. I think I stood under that shower for, I 
don't even know how long, but I couldn't get it off. I 
found debris inside my clothes that was just 
unbelievable how it got there. It just can't be 
explained. My uniform was totally gray. It was 
covered with a soot that I can't explain what it even 
was. My visor on my helmet was cracked, but I think I 
was one of the better ones that got away as far as 
injury was concerned. 

I'm alive. Anything else I can tell you? 
Q. Quite a story. Quite an experience. 
A. Well, it hasn't left me. Yes, people came 
here to give us counseling. After a while, while I 
felt they had the best of intentions, after a while I 
just simply had to tell them please don't come here no 
more, because if you come here and you sit like you are 
sitting across from me at the desk and ask me one more 
time how do you feel. Do you want to talk about it, I 
will go off the deep end. 

The only people I want to talk to is the 
people that were there with me. What has really helped 
me was to know that nobody in my unit got killed or 
seriously injured. The most they had were fractures. 
Rabbi Birnhack confirmed that all the Hatzolah 



26 
K. DESHORE 



volunteers survived. I spoke to all of the other 
people that were with me and they all survived. I was 
so grateful that Charlie Wells survived. He was the 
first one from my unit into that building. 

I have a problem with the whole situation 
still. I wish the Fire Department would come around 
with professionals and not people that are from a local 
counseling service or whatever -- excuse me for a 
moment. My concern really was that no one from the 
Fire Department made any kind of effort to even find 
out how we were doing. I didn't get a phone call. I 
didn't see my Chief until Saturday a week after that, 
which is 10 days later. 

I even received a phone call from Mr. Velez, 
the executive director of Elmhurst Hospital at my home, 
but no one from EMS contacted me to find out how I was 
doing. There was great concern here about some other 
people, which after I had gone through all the problems 
I had to handle, because again nobody was available to 
handle anything at the facility here concerning the 
other individuals that had gone through this trauma. 

To this day I have not been asked do I need 
any counselings from some certified people or do I wish 
to participate in counselings with a group. Elmhurst 



27 
K. DESHORE 



Hospital has offered me counseling services, which I 
will accept, but I feel more of an effort should have 
been made by the Fire Department or the EMS command to 
assist us that went through this. 

Anything else I can help you with? 

Q. No, ma'am, unless you have anything else that 
you would like to add. 

A. I'm retiring. 

Q. May I say congratulations on that. 

A. Thank you. 

INVESTIGATOR TAMBASCO: Thank you for your 

interview Captain. This interview concludes at 

0633 a.m. 



File No. 9110193 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

CAPTAIN JANICE OLSZEWSKI 

Interview Date: November 7, 2001 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



J. OLSZEWSKI 2 

MR. MURAD: Today is November 7th, 
2001. The time is 8:45. My name is Murray 
Murad. 

MR. CUNDARI: I'm George Cundari. 
MR. MURAD: Of the New York City Fire 
Department. I'm conducting an interview 
with -- 

CAPTAIN OLSZEWSKI: Janice Olszewski, 
captain EMS operations . 

MR. MURAD: The location of the 
interview is at Nine Metrotech at the Bureau 
of Investigations and Trials, and this is 
regarding the events that occurred on 
September 11th, 2001. 

Q. Captain, can you just tell us what 
occurred on that day? 

A. At what point do you want me to start? 
Q. From upstairs when you heard what 
happened. Where were you, from the beginning? 

A. I was sitting at my desk here at 
Metrotech on the seventh floor, and the pagers 
came over that there was a plane into the World 
Trade Center. So I went down to the end of the 
hall to look out the window, and you could see 



J. OLSZEWSKI 3 

that it had happened, the first plane into the 
building . 

So I went with Lieutenant Bruce Medjuck 
in my sedan I was using, a marked sedan, down to 
the site. So we grabbed a few radios and went 
down there. We went across the Brooklyn Bridge 
and arrived at Vesey and West. I don't remember 
exactly where I parked the car; I really don't. 
It might have been right at Vesey and West. I'm 
pretty sure, but I'm not too -- I think. 

So we got out, and we were in the 
vicinity of One World Trade. We were close to 
One World Trade at that point, and we went over 
and we bumped into Chief Gombo, Bruce and I. He 
asked us to go to the other side. So we ran down 
Vesey and got to Vesey and Church. I left my car 
where I had originally parked it. 

We met up with Lieutenant Davila in his 
suburban, and he was already starting to set up 
at Fulton and Church, a triage area, right next 
to the Millennium Hotel, across the street from 
the Trade Center, the towers. So that's where we 
assisted in setting up the triage area for the 
people being evacuated out of the buildings. 



J. OLSZEWSKI 4 

Q. This was still the first plane had hit? 

A. By the time we got there -- en route 
the second plane had hit. First plane had hit. 
We were on our way. When we got there we looked 
up and saw now the two holes. So by then the 
second plane had hit. Somewhere while we were 
driving there, it hit. 

So now they both had hit, and we went 
over to the other side to start patient care over 
there. So we set up the triage area over there 
in front of the Millennium Hotel at Church and 
Fulton. 

Q. Church and Fulton? 

A. Uh-huh. 

Q. You had a good view of the towers? 

A. Yeah. 

People were being evacuated, and units 
started to come in, from all agencies, as well as 
more supervisors. So as more supervisors came 
in, we were assigning them to each sector. We 
set up virtually all the sectors we can set up, 
and we started to get going with triage with 
triage tags, setting up areas where people were 
more badly hurt than others, telling other people 



J. OLSZEWSKI 5 

to just keep going if they were relatively all 
right . 

Q. A lot of people in that area? 

A. Yeah, there were. What we're talking 
about here, the time line for me being there in 
particular was something like 30 to 35 minutes. 
So we weren't able to do too much. We were going 
pretty good for what it was, though. We were 
starting to set up those sectors. We were 
setting up the sectors, staging treatment, 
transport, triage. 

The people were pouring out of the 
buildings, and a lot of them were coming over to 
our area. I cannot estimate how many. It's 
impossible. They were all over the place. They 
were on the corner. We were trying to keep them 
corralled in our area, but other agencies were 
breaking off into other little triage areas. I 
think there was another one over on Liberty and 
Church, another section there we heard, around 
the corner. 

So there were things sort of happening 
all over. So it's kind of hard to get an 
estimate of how many patients were in that area. 



J. OLSZEWSKI 6 

I can say in our area it was starting to become 
overwhelmed, that corner. There were starting to 
be so many. I figured we're going to have 
hundreds of patients coming out and we're going 
to have to have alternative areas to have them 
go, because it was too small. Right at that 
point the first building collapsed. 
Q. The south tower? 
A. The south tower, yeah. 

So as we heard it start to collapse and 
as we saw it collapsing, we or I, a lot of us, 
ran east on Fulton to get away. Then the cloud 
caught up, and we all just scattered and did our 
best to get out of there. I ended up on Broadway 
and Fulton and went north on Broadway, kept going 
north on Broadway. 

I set up an initial -- well, actually 
ambulances start to come down now south on 
Broadway that weren't involved in the collapse. 
These were fresh people coming in already, all 
kinds of units again coming south on Broadway. I 
met up with a few of them at something like 
Warren, Warren and Broadway. 

I walked down that far and was not -- 



J. OLSZEWSKI 7 

anybody who would listen to me, I didn't want 
them to go towards the area yet. I didn't think 
it was safe. I didn't know what was going on. I 
thought more could be happening down there. I 
didn't know if it was an explosion. I didn't 
know it was a collapse at that point. I thought 
it was an explosion or a secondary device, a 
bomb, the jet -- plane exploding, whatever. 

So I didn't know what was happening, so 
I was attempting to stop people from going in 
until we could get somebody back on the radio, 
reestablish a new command post and know that it 
was safe. So I was telling them not to go down. 
Some still went in; some didn't. 

Q. Were there radio transmissions at that 
time? 

A. I don't remember because I didn't have 
one at that point. I was pretty shocked and 
stunned and was choking and covered with dust. I 
was dazed and don't remember that. I didn't have 
a radio, so I don't know. 

So at that point you heard that the 
second -- I heard the rumbling again, and that 
was the second collapse. So now that's about 



J. OLSZEWSKI 8 

what, 10:30. That was about 10:30 now. Then I 
heard it again. You still didn't know what was 
happening, but you couldn't miss the rumbling 
sound. So you knew something else was happening. 

So I kept going north on Broadway 
again. I turned around and saw the cloud coming 
down again, so I started to run away from that 
cloud again. I got a little further north up 
Broadway. Now more ambulances are coming south. 
One of them stopped. I waved, I flagged one 
down. One of them stopped. I got in, and I 
said, "Turn around and just go north, because I 
don't know what's going on down there. It's too 
dangerous . Let try to get a little further 
north. " 

So they drove me north to White, 
Broadway and White. There the cloud had not come 
that far. We got out of the cloud and the mist, 
and we set up a patient collection area there. 
About five more ambulances stopped there, and we 
set up and were treating patients that were 
coming out. 

Now I started hearing things on the 
radio, because there were radios around me now 



J. OLSZEWSKI 9 

and I borrowed one from somebody from OMA. It 
was the frequency that supervisors were on. I 
heard Chief Kowalczyk, and he started saying that 
there was a new command post at Chambers and 
West, as I remember, to be the new command post. 

So I figured, okay, it's safe. We have 
something reestablished over there. He was 
asking for supervisors and units. They were 
asking for units on citywide, I guess. I don't 
know if there was citywide. But I know they were 
asking for units to come back. 

So the five or so units that were with 
me wanted to go back in, so I said, "Okay, go 
ahead. Go in." They started heading over. I 
left one unit there to keep treating the patients 
that were still trickling out. By then there 
weren't really many, and they were fine. They 
were pretty okay. So I left one there. 

I jumped in one of the ambulances going 
over and said, "Can you take me to the command 
post?" They said, "Sure." As they drove me 
over -- we got as far as about West and -- I know 
there's Chambers on here, but I don't see it. 
Q. Whatever you recall. 



J. OLSZEWSKI 10 

A. Whatever. I don't remember. I don't 
see it. Is it further north? 

Q. Chambers is here. 

A. I don't think I got -- I didn't get 
that far. I got stopped on West around here 
somewhere. There were so many emergency vehicles 
trying to get in, there was a little bit of a 
backup. So I only got about there. 

I got out of the ambulance, and I 
bumped into a chief officer, who insisted I go to 
the hospital. He just basically pushed me into 
the ambulance and said I needed to go. So I went 
to the hospital at that point. I was taken over 
to NYU Medical Center to be treated. 

When I got out, I made my way back 
here. I hitched a ride back here with another 
some sort of city vehicle, and I worked here over 
night until 6 in the morning. 

Q. Basically after the collapse you didn't 
see many patients? 

A. Well, the patients I saw -- 

Q. While you were there? 

A. Oh, you mean before the collapse. 

Q. After the collapse. 



J. OLSZEWSKI 11 

A. After the collapse the patients I saw 
were basically on White and Broadway coming out 
of the collapse and cloud that needed to be 
treated for whatever injuries, smoke inhalation, 
they had. We treated approximately 30 
patients -- again I don't know -- for that sort 
of thing, while we were waiting to hear somebody 
come back on the radio and let us know where we 
should go. 

After that, like I said, I went to the 
hospital, so no. 

Q. On the original collapse, you just saw 
the cloud start coming at you or you saw some of 
the top of the building start coming down? 

A. I wasn't facing it. Some people say 
they saw it tilting and going. I wasn't facing 
and I wasn't looking, so I didn't see that. But 
I did hear it, and then I turned around. By then 
the cloud had obliterated the building, so you 
couldn't see it going down. 

Not that you were standing there 
waiting and watching; you were running. The only 
chance you had to get away was to run. So there 
was no watching. I just heard it, saw the cloud, 



J. OLSZEWSKI 12 

knew something catastrophic had happened, and 
tried to get away. 

Q. Anything else? 
A. No. 

MR. MURAD: This concludes the 
interview. I'd like to thank you, Captain, 
for participating. 

The time now is 0855, and this 
concludes this portion of the interview. 



File No. 9110194 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

EMS LIEUTENANT BRADLEY MANN 

Interview Date: November 7, 2001 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



B. MANN 2 

MR. MURAD: Today is November 7th, 
2001. The time now is 1047 hours. My name 
is Murray Murad, M-U-R-A-D, with Richard 
Dun, D-U-N. We are currently sitting with 
Lieutenant -- 

LIEUTENANT MANN: Bradley Mann. 
MR. MURAD: And your rank? 
LIEUTENANT MANN: Lieutenant. 
MR. MURAD: Where do you work? 
LIEUTENANT MANN: Chief of Department's 
office, planning unit. 

MR. MURAD: This interview is being 
conducted at the Fire Department 
Headquarters at the Bureau of Investigations 
and Trials, and this is in regards to the 
tragic event on September 11th, 2001. 
Q. Lieutenant Mann, will you give your 
account? 

A. I was working the day tour. 
Approximately 10 minutes of 9, I was sitting in 
my cube with Captain Abdonahmod. The window in 
my cube overlooks Manhattan. 

As we were speaking, I thought I heard 
some type of noise. Abdo and I turned around and 



B. MANN 3 

looked out the window and saw thick black smoke 
billowing from the top of the World Trade Center. 

I got up, I walked around the corner to 
Chief Nigro's office, told him to look out the 
window. I walked down the hall to Chief Ganci's 
office and told him to look out the window. 
Chief Ganci told me to get everybody together, 
get as much equipment as we could find and we 
would meet in Manhattan. 

I grabbed Lieutenant John Nevins from 
the document control unit. We went to the EMS 
command where we secured about six radios and as 
many helmets as we could find. We went 
downstairs to the street, waited outside the 
building, and we got into a vehicle with Chief 
Cassano, the Citywide Tour Commander, and we 
responded into Manhattan. That was approximately 
10 minutes to 9 when I first looked out the 
window. I would say that we left headquarters 
probably about 9:05 a.m. 

We drove into Manhattan. We crossed 
the Brooklyn Bridge, from mid-span on the 
Brooklyn Bridge, from what we could see, it 
looked like just about everything from the 70th 



B. MANN 4 

floor on up was on fire. 

Chief Cassano was making some phone 
calls, and Lieutenant Nevins and I were 
discussing some things in the car as to what our 
role may be seeing as we didn't know what 
officers were already on the scene. 

We arrived in Manhattan. We came over 
the Brooklyn Bridge, went down Park Row and drove 
across Murray Street to South Broadway. Chief 
Cassano parked his car on the corner of South 
Broadway and Vesey. 

We exited the car. We put on our 
helmets and our turnout coats . Lieutenant Nevins 
and I made a right turn and headed west on Vesey 
Street between WTC 7 an WTC 2. By that point 
already, debris was falling from the towers. I 
actually was hit in the back by an unknown body 
part. I don't know what it was. 

We headed west on Vesey Street to the 
intersection of West Street. At that point I saw 
Lieutenant Davila from battalion 4, who at that 
point was the EMS command officer. I asked him 
what he needed, and he asked me to assist him to 
set up the EMS staging area. 



B. MANN 5 

At that point Lieutenant Nevins and I 
established an EMS staging area on Vesey Street 
between West Street and West End Avenue. We had 
approximately 50 to 60 ambulances on the street 
at that point, and we were in the process of 
organizing them and keeping track of who was 
there . 

As time went on, more staff chiefs 
arrived. Chief Gombo arrived. He took command 
of the incident. We spoke with him as to what 
type of action he wanted us to take, and he told 
us as soon as we had a count on how many units we 
had, ALS and BLS, to let him know and he would 
request resources as he needed them. 

I would say probably about maybe a half 
hour or so later all of a sudden we heard a roar. 
And I looked at Lieutenant Nevins and he looked 
at me, and we looked up. And the next thing we 
knew there was another plane, and it crashed into 
the other tower. 

We were in the staging area the entire 
time. Shortly before the first tower came down I 
remember feeling the ground shaking. I heard a 
terrible noise, and then debris just started 



B. MANN 6 

flying everywhere. People started running 
towards the staging area. 

By that point we probably had 70 or 80 
ambulances and vehicles in the staging area. 
People were jumping in their vehicles, trying to 
drive away from the scene. And Lieutenant Nevins 
and I instructed everybody to leave their 
vehicles and run west as far as they could until 
they couldn't run anymore. 

The rationale behind that being is if 
everybody tried to get out in a vehicle at the 
same time, obviously the street would be clogged 
and nobody would be able to get out. And as it 
turns out, a good majority of the vehicles that 
we told people to leave were crushed on Vesey 
Street just west of West Street. 

By the time the debris settled from the 
first collapse, we started to walk back east 
towards West Street, and a few minutes later -- I 
really don't remember the time frames because we 
were so busy in trying to account for who was in 
the staging area and who wasn't -- we basically 
had the same thing: The ground shook again, and 
we heard another terrible noise and the next 



B. MANN 7 

think we knew the second tower was coming down. 
And again we were running for our lives on Vesey 
Street . 

We ran as far as we could, turned the 
corner at West End Avenue and took shelter in the 
lobby of an office building, where we meet met up 
with a lot of the other chiefs -- Chief Gombo, 
Chief Kowalczyk -- and we discussed some further 
actions plans as to what we were going to do, 
seeing as we knew we weren't operating in a safe 
area. And we decided that we were going to 
establish a north staging area at Chelsea Piers. 

At that point myself and Chief 
Kowalczyk and an unknown EMT responded in an 
ambulance. I believe it was a Jamaica Hospital 
ambulance. We got a ride up to Chelsea Piers 
where we began to set up a staging area. I 
stayed at Chelsea Piers for the next three or 
four hours, organizing units and having resources 
ready to be called south. 

And then sometime in the afternoon, 
probably 2 or 3:00, I was requested to report 
back down to Chambers Street, and I was put to 
work on the command report. And that's pretty 



B. MANN 8 

much it. We just started doing shift work at the 
command post from about 3:00 p.m. on the 11th for 
the next about two and a half weeks. And that's 
really it. 

MR. MURAD: Rich, any questions? 
MR. DUN: No. 
Q. Were you operating with radios? 
A. We did have radios. I don't even know 
who I got it from, to be honest -- oh, I'm sorry, 
I remember when I took it. We were on citywide. 
I was the staging officer. And until Chief Gombo 
took over, I was communicating with Lieutenant 
Davila . 

MR. MURAD: Any other questions? 
Lieutenant Mann, I appreciate you 
giving the interview. This concludes the 
interview, and the time now is 10:55 hours. 
This concludes this portion of the 
interview. Thank you. 



File No. 9110200 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

EMT JOSEPH FORTIS 

Interview Date: November 9, 2001 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



J. FORTIS 2 

MR. RADENBERG: Today is November 9th, 
2001. I'm Paul Radenberg of the Fire 
Department, City of New York. The time is 
now 0717 hours. I'm conducting an interview 
with -- 

EMT FORTIS: Joseph Fortis, EMT 1376. 
MR. RADENBERG: Joseph is assigned to 
EMS Battalion 20. This interview is being 
conducted at EMS Battalion 20 regarding the 
events of September 11th, 2001. 
Q. Joseph, if you would begin from when 
you were assigned to the job. You can pretty 
much take it from there. 

A. Me and my partner Mike were at the 
station here. We first put all our stuff in the 
vehicle and we attempted to log on, and there was 
a computer problem with our ambulance. We heard 
the dispatcher start screaming for units. We 
volunteered . 

"3 John, put the job on the screen," 
and we couldn't log on. He just said, "Head down 
to staging. Start heading down there. I'll give 
you some more information." We attempted to log 
on a few times on the way. We went on the 



J. FORTIS 3 

Bruckner southbound and started heading down 
towards the incident. 

We went down the Bruckner and through 
that Brooklyn Battery Tunnel underpass, the 
Battery Park underpass. We were on our cell 
phones at the time, and I was talking to my 
mother and so was Mike. They told us a plane hit 
the building. We couldn't get the job up on the 
screen. We couldn't log on. So we were getting 
our information from our family. 

We went down the Bruckner to the FDR, 
and then we jumped on the FDR and they closed the 
highway. We had maybe like 15 cop cars and 
highway cars and 3 fire trucks and like 5 
ambulances. We headed down there. We came out, 
and we didn't know what was going on. It was 
just an accident at the time. We came out 
through the tunnel. 

When we pulled up onto West Street, the 
whole world was pretty much blocked in front of 
the towers. So we actually went into the 
oncoming traffic. They had it closed down. We 
proceeded north. They told us staging was at 
Vesey and West. 



J. FORTIS 4 

We got there and we backed our 
ambulance -- I was, and Mike was teching. We 
backed the ambulance in. Whoever the captain was 
there at the scene asked us to just grab all our 
equipment and stay with our vehicles and we were 
just placed in front of the vehicles at the time. 
So we did that and lit up a cigarette and waited 
to see what they wanted to do. 

I believe at that time -- I can't even 
tell you the time frame. We actually heard like 
the engines I guess for the second plane coming 
in, and it just got louder and, boom, the second 
plane hit the other tower. We stood there and we 
watched. I guess like a fireball cloud came 
down. We were all standing on the corner I guess 
by the pedestrian bridge off the corner there 
with our equipment. We were just amazed in awe. 

Everybody was running at us saying 
evacuate and we're under attack kind of thing. 
Then the light went on to run. We turned around 
and started running west on Vesey Street, and we 
made it just past the American Express building. 

It was just coming too fast. We 
couldn't get away from that cloud per se, and we 



J. FORTIS 5 

ducked into the lobby of a building there. I 
believe it was between -- it might have even been 
the American Express building on the corner 
there. 

Q. At this point it's the collapse of the 
first building now? 

A. No, no. This is just when the second 
plane. 

Q. Okay. 

A. The buildings were still up. So it was 
just a blast from I guess the second plane, I 
think, came in, and the dust cloud just came. We 
were on the corner there, and you just felt the 
heat. Our back and all our eyebrows were all 
singed and everything. We had a little flash 
burn because we were right -- I guess when it 
were came were we right on West off the corner of 
I guess where six was, if that was it, if this is 
West Street here. 

Q. Yeah. 

A. We were actually right by the 
pedestrian bridge, because when we -- the bridge 
is there, and we were actually over here and the 
ambulances were parked off the corner. 



J. FORTIS 6 

Q. South of the pedestrian bridge? 
A. South of the pedestrian bridge, when I 
guess the second plane came in. So we ran. 
Everybody was running down Vesey west, and that's 
the way we went. After that incident and 
everybody composed themselves, a couple minutes 
later everybody was just like -- it was just 
chaos. 

One of the people who worked here at 
the station, I believe he just finished dropping 
off his girlfriend or his wife at the Trade 
Center. She worked there. So we were actually 
trying to keep him calm and keep him from running 
into the building. It actually took like three 
of us to stop him from running across, just 
running back into the building. He wanted us all 
to go with him. They were like stay here, so we 
stayed there. 

Then everybody composed themselves, and 
we were back on the corner of -- back on Vesey 
and West where the staging was, and they were 
like, "Stay right here. Stay right here. Nobody 
go towards the building." 

All of a sudden we started -- they 



J. FORTIS 7 

wanted us to go towards whatever building that we 
were going to do triage in the lobby of -- I 
don't know if it was one or two, but we were 
supposed to set up a triage there. But they 
weren't too sure yet. They were waiting for a 
confirmation or something. We had all our 
equipment, and everything was already singed from 
that point. 

Like I said, we started ahead like 
halfway across West Street with our stuff, and 
the ground started shaking like a train was 
coming. You looked up, and I guess -- I don't 
know, it was one that came down first or two? 
Which one? 

Q. The first one to come down was the 
south tower, number two. 

A. Two? We were standing on West Street, 
and the ground started to shake. You looked up, 
and it looked like a ticker tape parade off the 
back of the building, because all this stuff 
started coming down. We thought it was just like 
all papers and everything. Like I said, there 
was pieces of body parts all over the place. 

We came halfway across the street, and 



J. FORTIS 8 

the building was coming down. Everybody was 
running out of the same evac, the building's 
falling and ESU and everybody and everyone's 
screaming "Get back! Get back!" 

We dropped all our stuff and started 
running again, west on Vesey, headed towards 
Vesey and West. Then we went west on Vesey. We 
just made the turn on I believe on North End 
Street. Just as we got to the corner, I guess 
the debris from the cloud came up Vesey and up 
Murray and then up and over that building that's 
there. So we actually stood up against the 
building here. 

Q. Vesey and North End? 

A. Right, right. The lobby is like right 
there. They didn't want us to go in the 
building. Actually everybody -- it was just 
chaotic. That cloud came, and we just leaned up 
against the building and it was just -- no one 
could breathe or anything. 

Then after that we -- an ambulance came 
by from I think it might have been Cabrini's 
ambulance, and they stopped right in front of 
that building on North End Street. We all jumped 



J. FORTIS 9 

in the ambulance. Like I say, you could just see 
the cloud coming up and over the building. We 
waited and the ground was shaking and all that. 
We waited like two, three minutes. We got out of 
that vehicle and proceeded I guess east on Vesey 
towards the buildings again. 

At that point there were -- all the 
ambulances on the corner there, I believe like 
the first three or four off that corner were 
destroyed. We were maybe the seventh or eighth 
ambulance off the line. So our vehicle was -- we 
left it running, so it was still running at the 
time. The windows were open and all that, and a 
couple windows blew out. 

I jumped in the ambulance, and we 
pulled them on -- we headed westbound and parked 
them in front of the building there on North End 
Street. Then I went back and we grabbed 
Cornell's bus and grabbed like three other 
vehicles that were all running. I think it was 
like Cabrini, Cornell and then our ambulance, 
429. At that point I didn't know where my 
partner Mike went, because he went one way and I 
went the other way. 



J. FORTIS 10 

After that we actually went towards the 
buildings there, and we were just taking people 
from -- I guess from right off the front of Trade 
Center one, all these people, and we would bring 
them over to the ambulance and they would go. 
And we would go back to almost the stairs of 
building one again and just help people straight 
across the street, and back and forth. 

Then everyone was screaming that it's 
unsafe and everybody had to pull back. Meanwhile 
everybody was still taking people from -- helping 
people from the sidewalk in front of the towers 
across the street almost to Vesey and West, and 
from there they were going to an ambulance or 
they actually set up a triage in the American 
Express building, I believe it was, on the corner 
there. 

We went across to the sidewalk like 
two, three times, and then when we came back the 
third time they told us to stay here. We were 
going to do like -- make that like a forward 
triage, this American Express building. 

It was me and my partner and Steve 
Pilla and a couple other people from the station. 



J. FORTIS 11 

We had like those multiple oxygen mask trees on 
like a big tank, and we were just bringing them 
to only firemen and cops. We didn't have any 
civilians whatsoever. We had a couple chiefs. 
Everybody was just like minor cuts. Nobody was 
life -threatening. 

Everyone was hacking, so we actually 
had like maybe 20 to 30 police and firemen on 
like the non-re-breathers. I think it was on in 
the American Express on the corner there. 

A few minutes after that, after we had 
everybody we were treating, they were shipping 
them down the block. ESU came in and said they 
thought the gas lines were going to blow for the 
building or something and we needed to evac out 
of there immediately. 

So we just grabbed all the stuff again 
and piled them on the stretchers. Actually all 
the firemen and cops were ripping off their 
oxygen masks and running out of the building. As 
we got out the American Express building on the 
corner there, we started running again westbound, 
because everybody was just screaming, "It's going 
to blow! Run, don't walk, and just leave all the 



J. FORTIS 12 

equipment . " 

I guess the next building came down. 
Again we were like halfway up the block, and it 
just came and annihilated the triage area. I 
believe two other firemen and a cop were killed 
or something over there or whatever it was. 

So after that again we went back to 
that building on North End and Vesey Street, the 
building on the corner there. We set up -- they 
wanted to do it there, set up a forward triage 
there instead. Again we set up everything again. 
There's an atrium there, and we had everything 
underneath the atrium with the glass, we had to 
move everything over. 

After I guess the second building came 
down and that cloud came again, again nobody 
could even breathe. We had a line with breathers 
on in the back of the ambulance because the 
windows were missing and the cloud was just 
devastating. 

After that then everybody split up. I 
don't know where Mike, my partner, went. He 
wound up I believe on the opposite side almost 
over like at Trinity and Church, because we got 



J. FORTIS 13 

separated. He ran left, and I ran right. He got 
to the other side. 

Then after everything was kind of 
calmed down a little bit, it must have been after 
10:30 then. We were just doing, again, just 
firemen and police officers. We didn't have any 
civilians whatsoever. They were all just like 
respiratory problems and minor cuts. A couple 
people were kind of critical. So we would take 
them and throw them in the ambulances. 

Then after both buildings were down, we 
were actually going from right to where the 
sidewalks used to be and just trying to move 
things with everyone who was there and put people 
into ambulances or direct them, throw a gauze pad 
on their head and tell them to keep walking north 
on West Street, just keep walking north. 

That's really about it. We did that, 
and then time just passed. The next thing I 
remember was I guess when the third building came 
down. We were right in front of - - I don't know 
if that's a school. We were actually still on 
Vesey and West but just north of the pedestrian 
bridge on the corner there. Everybody stood back 



J. FORTIS 14 

right off the point where the water starts. I 
don't know where that is. Is that right there? 
Wherever the water is, there's like a little -- 

Q. This would be the marina behind it. 

A. We were here. I thought there was 
another -- like here where the boats pull in. I 
don't know if we were all the way over here. 
They actually had a couple tugboats there. 

Q. I know it's just in behind the Winter 
Garden. 

A. Right. On the other side of the 
building here there's actually -- where 's the 
high school from here, Stuyvesant? 

Q. It's further north. 

A. When the third building came down, 
that's where we were. We were actually -- they 
pulled us all back. 

Q. Yeah, Stuyvesant is all the way up here 
just north of Chambers. 

A. They had some boats over here. 
Actually they pulled us all the way back that far 
at the point because they didn't want any -- they 
didn't want us anywhere near it. Everyone was 
just running around. When the third building 



J. FORTIS 15 

came down, we were on that corner in front of the 
school, and everybody just stood back. 

They pulled us all back at the time, 
almost about an hour before it, because they were 
sure -- they knew it was going to come down, but 
they weren't sure. So they pulled everyone back, 
and everybody stood there and we actually just 
waited and just waited and waited until it went 
down, because it was unsafe. They wouldn't let 
anyone next to I guess the two piles, we would 
call them, where one and two was. We stood back. 
We waited. 

Then after the building came down and 
the dust and everything settled, everybody 
actually went back. Everybody was just moving 
things, and we were actually picking up a lot of 
body parts and putting them in red bags and just 
having them shipped to the morgue and this and 
that. We did that for a couple hours, and it 
started to get dark. 

The next thing I remember, I was 
down -- it must have been about 10:00, and they 
had like a whole bunch of people from our station 
were right in front of the school, Stuyvesant, 



J. FORTIS 16 

and they were all holding hands praying. I 
walked over and slapped them five. I was like, 
"What are you guys crying -- it's all right, you 
know, things are going to get better." 

They had me, because Mike was on the 
other side, and I guess at 12 he talked to 
someone and said "Where's your partner?" They're 
like, "I don't know. I think he was at -- he was 
supposed to be --" we were just taking people 
from the stairs of the building. We weren't 
going near the lobby. They said it was unsafe. 
They weren't too sure. 

They said, "We think the building's 
safe, but don't just go anywhere yet." They 
wanted to do triage in one of the building 
lobbies, but they said hold off a few minutes and 
we'll see how it goes, and then things rolled 
from there. 

When we split up, he said, "They told 
us to go to the lobby." So he thought I was in 
the lobby of the building at the time. It was 
about 3:00 that afternoon, and our cell phones 
finally went on so I called my house. I talked 
to my wife and told her I was fine. 



J. FORTIS 17 

From there, like I said, I was talking 
to the guys at the station and Lieutenant 
Sullivan smacked me in the head and we were 
laughing. He said, "Thank God you're okay, you 
moron. We had you down because you were supposed 
to be in the building." I was joking around with 
him, saying, "Well, you know it takes a unique 
person to be a firefighter. I don't run into 
burning buildings that people are running out 
of." 

When we were there, even my partner, we 
were like just to watch all those regular people 
jumping out the windows was -- we saw maybe like 
10 or 12 people jump out the windows. That was 
the thing, when we get to almost the stairs when 
the buildings were up, we just looked up just to 
make sure, because you couldn't help but look up, 
just to make sure everything wasn't coming down. 

What else can I say? After they found 
out at 10:00 that I was okay, I told Lieutenant 
Sullivan I wanted to go home. He just gave me 
the keys to an ambulance that was off the corner 
that was destroyed. I boosted it, and it started 
up. It was destroyed. I got in, and I drove and 



J. FORTIS 18 

I drove back to the station. 

I dropped a fireman off halfway up off 
the West Side Highway. I dropped him off 
somewhere. I don't even remember who he was. I 
dropped him off. Then I came home by myself. I 
pulled into the garage of Battalion 20. That's 
when everyone found out I was okay. I was on the 
missing list and all this. 

Supposedly my mother was here at 12. I 
was on the phone with her at about 10 to 9, 5 to 
9, saying I'm on my way down. She works in 
Brooklyn. Like I said, they were telling us what 
was happening. So when the phone went dead, she 
came here to the station from home. It was 12, 
12:30. 

Whatever transpired here, they said, 
"Well, we can't get in touch with everybody, but 
we think everyone's fine," this and that. 
They're like, "He's not even down there." She's 
like, "Don't tell me he's not down there. He 
told me he was in front of it," because we 
weren't logged onto the computer, so it didn't 
show that 03 John was there. That's how that 
started . 



J. FORTIS 19 

Q. What was your partner's last name? 

A. Negron, Mike. He doesn't want to talk 
about it. 

Q. Okay. No problem. 

When you came out of the Battery Park 
and coming up West Side Highway, did you park on 
West Side Highway or -- 

A. I parked right on Vesey right off West 
Side Highway. There was maybe one, two, three, 
four ambulances off the corner, and then, boom, 
we were the fifth one right there, because we 
were directly in front of the entrance of the 
American Express building. 

Q. Right. Then you staged down just 
south -- 

A. Just south of the bridge. 

Q. --of the bridge, on the west side of 
the street? 

A. Right. Then as people were coming out 
and were having difficulty coming out down the 
stairs -- because they really didn't want us to 
cross the median. That was kind of like, "Guys, 
just don't cross the median for a few minutes." 
Everybody wanted to help, but they 



J. FORTIS 20 

really had it under control. I've been here ten 
years, and there was a reason for them to tell me 
to stay there. I pretty much followed the rules. 

Q. Right. When you arrived at West and 
Vesey, do you remember seeing EMS officers down 
there, other personnel that you recognized? 

A. When we came up -- when we were coming 
north on West Street, we had the windows open. 
It was so funny, I remember Mike looking out the 
window going, holy, you know, look at that shit. 
He was looking out the window, out the passenger 
window. There were so many vehicles parked from 
Liberty all the way to Vesey on the north side of 
West Street, heading north on West Street, that 
you just couldn't get by. 

I always like to leave myself an out. 
They told me to get to Vesey and West anyway, so 
that's where I was going. There's like a little 
island there, a little sidewalk. It must have 
been just south or actually over here by wherever 
we came out on Cedar. I came into the southbound 
lanes, because it was shut down anyway, and just 
drove all the way up to Vesey and West and backed 
the ambulance in right there. 



J. FORTIS 21 

So when we came by, we saw all the -- 
there was a couple I think it might have been 
like Cabrini and a Metro Care ambulance, a lot of 
the private ambulances and the fire companies 
were all right in front of -- right on the north 
side of West Street there, and we just drove 
right past all of them, because we were supposed 
to be on Vesey and West, because you always leave 
yourself an out. 

Q. Yeah. 

A. All those vehicles were parked there. 
I don't remember who it was, but we saw I believe 
there was Deshore from the academy, from EMS. 

Q. Captain Deshore? 

A. Captain Deshore. They were heading 
towards -- everyone was running across in front 
of us, and we were still going to Vesey and West. 
It looked like her and a bunch of other EMS 
workers. There was someone else from -- I 
believe his last name is Joseph, one of the other 
new guys here. I thought I saw him go by and one 
of the medics from the south. I only know his 
first name is Joe. They were all going towards 
the site. We were still trying to get to Vesey 



J. FORTIS 22 

and West at the time. 

So we just backed the vehicle up there 
and, like I said, put our equipment in the front. 
Just as I was ripping tape to put 03 John on the 
windshield, I guess that's when we heard the 
turbines or whatever. 

Q. The second plane? 

A. The second plane per se. We didn't 
even know it was that until afterwards, until 
days after. 

Q. Right. 

A. The people you were with, it was Chris 
Attanasio and Roland. They were like, "Oh, no, 
dude, that was" -- the first thing we heard was 
the plane coming in, because then we were there 
for the other collapses. I didn't even realize 
it because it was just chaos and everybody was 
just scared, to be honest with you. 

Like I said, when that blast came out, 
everybody got this little sing. Even like the 
little bands on our jackets just melted right 
off, the reflective bands. We just dropped 
everything when the cloud came, composed 
ourselves, and went back to the site again. 



J. FORTIS 23 

Then the rest of the day between 
whatever, 4 and 10, after I guess the third 
building went down, they said it was okay. 
Everybody was really on like the bucket thing and 
on the pile, just moving debris for a couple 
hours. 

Then when I went to go get a soda, then 
I was relieved. They sent me home. 

Q. After the second hit, you came back 
pretty much to the same area south of the 
pedestrian bridge? 

A. Yeah, after the second plane hit we ran 
to North End Street and Vesey and waited until 
the blast went by, went back to where we 
originally staged and moved all the ambulances 
back around the corner. Then we went after that 
and just with our equipment in the stretchers 
stood over here and waited because they wanted to 
keep the vehicles out to the side. They were 
just like, "Grab whatever equipment you can." 

Q. You were back down on West, south of 
the pedestrian bridge? 

A. Yeah, by the bridge. Actually just 
north of the bridge, because the bridge was 



J. FORTIS 24 

annihilated at that point. 

Q. When the treatment area was set up in 
the American Express building, that was after the 
first collapse? 

A. After the first collapse. We must have 
been in that building for not even like --it 
probably was a while, like 10, 15 minutes, but it 
just seemed like for a minute or two. I guess 
the big one's an H tank. We had the multiple 
trees, and all I did was rip off the 
non-breathers and people just coming in, just 
policemen, firemen. We started doing our thing. 

Like I said, all of a sudden ESU came 
in and said the building was unsafe and we needed 
to get out of that building because they thought 
that the gas lines were going to go. 

From there we moved again back to North 
End and Vesey in whatever building that was 
there. That's where we started to do another 
triage, forward triage thing. There was a little 
construction there, and the water's right there. 
So they said, okay, maybe it's not safe there. 
One building was still up. 

What happened was everyone was just 



J. FORTIS 25 

taking vehicles and taking people and heading 
northbound. We stayed there for a few. It was 
me and my partner -- not my partner, Steve Pilla 
and a couple other gentlemen. I don't even 
remember who they were. Everyone was just 
throwing equipment into that location from all 
the other vehicles that were destroyed. They 
would just salvage the equipment and bring it 
right to there. 

They determined that that was a little 
too close still, and they wanted us out of that 
building. We to go north. When the second 
building was coming down, we must have been like 
on Murray and North End, and the cloud was coming 
from the second building. So we actually went 
back into this one here just to avoid the cloud. 
Then after that passed, that's when we returned 
back to actually ground zero or whatever then. 

Q. Any thoughts or comments, anything else 
you'd like to add? 

A. No. 

Q. Okay. I think we covered this, but 
when you first arrived at staging do you remember 
the officers that were there? 



J. FORTIS 26 

A. I can't remember his name, but I see 
him regularly. I believe there was a lieutenant 
there, a captain, and one of the chiefs was just 
going by. But I don't even remember who they 
were. As a matter of fact, I saw him maybe down 
there another time, and he was like, "I'm glad to 
see you're okay," and that kind of thing. I 
don't know him by his name. It's always like, 
"Hey, what's up," that kind of thing. 

Q. Right. 

A. That's really about it. 

Q. Okay. I thank you. 

MR. RADENBERG: The time is now 0749, 

and the interview is concluded. 



File No. 9110201 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

EMT JOHN FELIDI 

Interview Date: November 9, 2001 



Transcribed by Elisabeth F. Nason 



J. FELIDI 

MR. RADENBERG: Today is November 9, 2001. 
I'm Paul Radenberg of the Fire Department of the 
City of New York. The time is now 0756 hours. 
Q. I'm conducting an interview with -- 
A. John Felidi, Battalion 20, 2985. 
Q. Okay. Mr. Felidi is an EMT. This interview 
is being conducted at EMS Battalion 20 regarding the 
events of September 11, 2001. 

John, begin with when you were assigned to 
the job, where you were, et cetera? 

A. I was at the station in the morning when we 
were watching the news and they were showing pictures 
of what was happening at the World Trade Center, that a 
plane hit the tower. At that point, Chief Basile came 
in and said John, take the LSI) truck down to the World 
Trade Center. So, that's what I did. Took the West 
Side Highway all the way down. 

I got to about the West Side Highway, between 
Barclay and Vesey Street. I couldn't go any further, 
so I parked the vehicle there and spoke to Chief 
Villani. I told him I couldn't go any further, due to 
the mass of emergency vehicles that were down there. 
So he told me go down, to take the vehicle and put it 
on the other side of the West Side Highway, which is 



J. FELIDI 

the west -- the west side of the highway there. So I 
did. I went down to -- took the West Side Highway back 
to Murray Street, made a left on Murray Street, came up 
North End, came down Vesey Street and I parked 
approximately right in this area here, which is the 
West Side Highway and Vesey Street, right here. 

Q. So, right by like 7 World Financial Center? 

A. Correct. 

Q. The American Express building? 

A. Right near there. We were doing some 
triaging, triaging a couple of patients, here and 
there. We were ordered to evacuate that area. They 
didn't give me a reason why. So that's what I did. We 
pushed down to North End and Vesey. At that point in 
time we were also doing some triaging. We -- now we 
are down there. We heard a rumble. I heard the rumble 
and looked in the back of me all I seen was a monstrous 
-- I can't even describe it. A cloud. Looked like 
debris, dust. 

We ran down to North End between Murray and 
Vesey Street. There was a -- I think there is a -- I 
thought there was a hotel and office building right 
there. We ran in there. The cloud was really really 
bad. So we ran in there and we waited until it 



J. FELIDI 

subsided. That was about like 10, 15 minutes went by. 
I was down there, I lost track of time so I really 
can't -- even speak about time. 

So after that happened, we found out that the 
second tower that was hit collapsed. We went back out, 
started triaging again. We asked a fireman that we 
had, a Captain from one of the -- actually, I don't 
even know what his name was -- what Battalion or 
whichever he was at. We were triaging there. There 
was so much debris down there, like you were covered. 

At one point while we were triaging again, we 
were told to evacuate the area because the other tower 
was about to collapse. At that point in time I tried 
to jump in the vehicle and the only thing I remember is 
getting into the vehicle. I didn't even have time to 
put the key in the ignition and that was it. That was 
so - - I mean I think I was closer to that tower than 
this one. 

Q. Yes, number 1. The north tower. 

A. Right, that's the one. That it was so dark 
down there that I couldn't even see in front of me. I 
tried even moving the vehicle about two feet but I 
couldn't do it, because people are running everywhere. 
We had EMS personnel in the middle of the street. We 



J. FELIDI 

had the New York City Police Department running. I 
seen a couple of firemen running by me, so all I did 
was get in the vehicle, stay there until -- actually it 
came to a stand still. 

That was about a few minutes. That was a 
while. The first time I got covered with it. The 
second time we knew that it was going to collapse. We 
were told to evacuate the area. That was it. I got 
into the vehicle, put the key in and I couldn't even go 
anywhere. 

About 15 minutes went by. We started 
triaging in - - I don't remember, I think the Ambassador 
or the Embassy. 

Q. Embassy? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Embassy Suites? 

A. Right. We started triaging in there and we 
were getting hit heavy with patients. About -- I'm 
giving you a rough estimate because I really don't 
remember the time. About 20 minutes to half an hour 
went by, we were told to evacuate that area due to 
major gas leaks in the area. At that point in time I 
started putting some of the equipment that I had. I 
left a lot of equipment down there because in the 21 



J. FELIDI 

years I have been there, I have never never seen 
anything like this. Never. 

We were told to evacuate the area and we were 
told to proceed down North End to Chambers, take the 
West Side Highway up to Chelsea Piers, 23 Street. At 
that point in time I think, I picked up Chief Pascale. 
I put her in the truck and I think there was also a 
Lieutenant and her aide, because they needed a ride up 
to the Chelsea Piers. I even seen Dario Gonzalez, Dr. 
Dario Gonzalez. I seen him down there. I seen 
numerous people from the Battalion down there. 

There was one point in time that we were 
scared shit. What scared the shit out of me was we 
were down there and all we heard was another aircraft 
coming, but it turned out to be, I don't know, an F-15. 

Let me tell you something you never seen 
anybody stand still, because you didn't know where to 
run, honestly. We evacuated that area and went down to 
Chelsea Piers. I started setting up a triage area down 
there and at that point in time I stood there until I 
was relieved. I came back to the station. 

Q. Okay. When you got to west side and Vesey 
and you saw Chief Villani, do you remember seeing any 
other people down there that you recognized? 



J. FELIDI 

A. I remember -- after the collapse I remember 
seeing Chief Basile. He was covered in debris because 
he was one of the Chiefs that I believe I think was in 
the pedestrian walkway when it collapsed. Also I saw 
Louie Cook down there, who was the ALS coordinator next 
door, in the division. They were covered in -- full of 
debris. 

Q. Do you remember where you saw them? 

A. About right here when we were down by triage, 
in this area. 

Q. By North End and Vesey? 

A. Yes, the hotel down there. 

Q. Yes, that's the Embassy I believe. 

A. Yes. In fact I don't remember the name of 
it. I know it's right here. 

Q. All right. Do you recall anybody with Chief 
Villani when you first arrived? 

A. I seen a Lieutenant, but I don't know his 
name. I really don't know his name. 

Q. All right. Other EMS ambulances down in the 
area? 

A. I seen one of the new MERVs from Manhattan. 
I know it was Manhattan because it was one of the new 
ones. One of the last ones we got in. I seen people 



J. FELIDI 

getting triaged in the MERV, but I couldn't tell you 
who they -- what their names or anything like that. 

Q. Okay. No problem. Heading up to Chelsea 
Piers, you picked up Chief Pascale and her aide? 

A. Right. 

Q. Do you remember roughly where you picked them 
up? Was it somewhere over here on North End or -- 

A. No, I think it was near West Side Highway. I 
think around or past Chambers Street. 

Q. North of Chambers? 

A. Yes. I think -- she was - - as a matter of 
fact, I seen her when we were triaging in that 
building. But then after the second collapse, 
everybody scattered and I didn't see her until -- up in 
that area. Like Chambers and the West Side Highway. 

Q. Okay. When tower one came down you rode that 
out in the LSU? 

A. No, that one, what I did was -- 

Q. Tower one was the second tower to fall. 

A. Right. When the second tower fell I was 
right here in this area here. I heard the rumble. 
Sorry, that was the first tower that fell. I heard the 
rumble. We were in this area here. 

Q. Right. West Side Highway and Vesey? 



J. FELIDI 

A. Right. So when that collapsed, I felt a 
tremor and I ran towards North End, but we had a cloud 
following us, so I ran around the corner to try to 
avoid it. It came down Vesey Street. Then it came 
down also Murray, so I was stuck right in the middle of 
that area. The only thing I could do was duck and ran 
into that building, but I got covered in debris because 
by the time I turned the block here, it caught me. 

Q. Right. 

A. When the second tower fell, that one we were 
right here in this area here again. That one was more, 
like I would say more powerful, because I was closer to 
it. That one I got full of debris. Also, that was 
when I jumped into the LSI) truck. I didn't get a 
chance to put the key in, you know. 

Because the first time, I believe it was the 
first tower that fell, the LSI) truck was here and I 
ran. I left the truck. I ran around the corner, but 
when the second tower fell, I never forget that sound. 
It sounded like a freight train passing by. I never 
forget that sound, never forget that sound. Like a 
freight train. 

Q. Okay. Anything else you would like to add, 
thoughts or comments or anything like that? No? 



10 

J. FELIDI 



MR. RADENBERG: Okay. John, I thank you very 
much. The time is now 0708 hours. This interview 
is concluded. 



File No. 9110202 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

PARAMEDIC KEVIN DARNOWSKI 

Interview Date: November 9, 2001 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



K. DARNOWSKI 2 

MR. RADENBERG: Today is November 9th, 
2001. I'm Paul Radenberg of the Fire 
Department, City of New York. The time is 
now 0934 hours. I am conducting an 
interview with - - 

PARAMEDIC DARNOWSKI: Paramedic Kevin 
Darnowski from Battalion 20, shield 3103. 

MR. RADENBERG: This interview is being 
conducted at EMS Battalion 20 regarding the 
events of September 11th, 2001. 
Q. Kevin? 

A. Regarding the events of September 11th, 
2001, my story is I was dropping my fiancee's son 
off at school in Brooklyn on Fourth Avenue. 
After dropping him off, I was heading northbound 
on Fourth Avenue, and I looked to my left and I 
see the north tower of the World Trade Center 
burning. My fiancee works in the north tower on 
the 98th floor. 

At that time I proceeded to call 
Lieutenant Guzman here at Battalion 20 and 
question him as to whether or not he had a job in 
the system for the World Trade Center. He told 
me that he had reports of a fire on the upper 



K. DARNOWSKI 3 

floors of the World Trade Center. 

At that time he asked me if I wanted to 
continue to work or go down to the scene. I 
opted to go down to the scene, as I was on my way 
to work anyway. And in uniform, I opted to go 
down to the scene at that time. 

As I headed down towards the scene, I 
was trying to call my fiancee in her office, and 
there was no answer on the phone. It just kept 
giving me a busy signal. I tried her cell phone, 
and there was no answer on her cell phone. 

I was approaching the Brooklyn Battery 
Tunnel. Behind me was EMS Chief Goldfarb. In 
front of me was a couple of tower ladders and 
rescue companies and engine companies that were 
going through the tunnel. 

Right before the tolls on the Brooklyn 
side heading towards Manhattan at the Battery 
Tunnel, we were sitting in traffic and we watched 
United Flight 175 hit tower two, which was the 
south tower of the World Trade Center. 

At that time everybody was just in 
shock. The firefighters and I were just really 
trying to get through the traffic when the plane 



K. DARNOWSKI 4 

hit, and we were just standing there in like awe 
of what was happening. Finally we ended up 
getting into the tunnel, and we ended up sitting 
in the tunnel for about another 10 minutes, 10 to 
15 minutes, trying to get through the traffic. 

When we finally got through the tunnel 
to the other side, I parked my car on the corner 
of Carlisle and West Side Highway, West Street, 
and I proceeded northbound on West Street towards 
the command center or what I believed to be the 
command center at that time. 

I went along the center median, 
meanwhile looking up at the towers in disbelief 
and basically sheer awe at what was going on. 
None of us at the Battery Tunnel knew what was 
going on until the second plane hit. Right then 
we knew it was a terrorist attack. 

So as I'm walking up to the scene, I 
see droves of firefighters running towards the 
buildings, but nobody's coming out on the West 
Street side. I questioned one Fire Department 
official -- I believe he was a captain; I don't 
remember his name -- as to why there was nobody 
coming out on this side. He told me the Port 



K. DARNOWSKI 5 

Authority had locked the doors on that side of 
the building and was having everybody come out on 
the Trinity side by the church, like Trinity and 
Fulton area for easy evacuation. 

At that point I met up with EMS Chief 
Goldfarb again and his aide Mary. We were over 
by Three Financial Center. At that point we were 
standing with numerous amounts of firefighters 
and fire supervisors and police officers, and we 
got a report of another incoming airplane. So we 
proceeded to go into a parking garage that was in 
Three Financial Center underneath. 

Shortly after that we realized what was 
flying over was the armed forces F-14s flying 
over, and we got a confirmation from the FAA -- 
over the police radio we got a confirmation from 
FAA that all airports had been closed and there 
were no planes flying within the New York City 
area at that specific time. 

So we all came out of the garage, and 
Chief Goldfarb started setting up triage on the 
corner of West and Vesey with the ambulances 
going towards North End Avenue, facing West 
Street along Vesey, along Three and four 



K. DARNOWSKI 



Financial Center. 

At that time we weren't getting that 
many -- we ended up putting -- I don't know what 
this building was over here. 

Q. Vesey and North End. 

A. Yeah, there was a building on the -- 

Q. Embassy Hotel? 

A. It might have been The embassy Hotel. 

Q. There's a movie theater also. 

A. Right, right. There was a parking lot 
in the front on West Street. We ended up putting 
triage initially in Three and Four Financial 
Center . 

At that time Chief Goldfarb and -- I 
had explained my situation, that my fiancee was 
up on the 98th floor of tower one and I would be 
as much help as I can. He told me regarding 
patient care-wise that don't bother with patient 
care, just with moving of patients and equipment. 
So we went back over to the pedestrian 
bridge in front of Three Financial Center. We 
were standing under there with the Fire 
Department command center. We were attempting to 
set up a command center there, when one of the 



K. DARNOWSKI 7 

firefighters starts screaming, "Look up!" 
Everybody looks up, and we were watching the 
people jump out of One World Tower Center and 
hitting the overhang in front of World Trade 
Center where the taxis would let people off 
originally. 

At that time it was just -- the best 
word to describe it was pure chaos. Nobody 
really knew what was going on other than the 
firefighters going in to try to put out the 
fires. 

Chief Goldfarb instructed me to go back 
to the MERV, which was sitting on West and Vesey. 
I went back over to the MERV, and I met up with 
one of my coworkers from Battalion 20, Chris 
Attanasio. He put me in the MERV, because he 
knew my situation, and he tried to calm me down 
and just told me to sit tight and relax and just 
hope for the best and just things like that. He 
was trying to calm me down and stuff. I just had 
to get out of the MERV. I had to be outside on 
the street watching what was going on. 

At that point Chris Attanasio took me 
and he told me we were ordered by -- he didn't 



K. DARNOWSKI 8 

specify any -- to go over to West Street just 
south of the north tower right at the base of the 
hotel over there, because we were getting 
patients from Two World Trade Center that they 
were bringing down the stairs from Two World 
Trade Center down to West Street. We were going 
to be getting patients over there. 

So I proceeded with him and his partner 
over to that area, and we started loading 
patients, firefighters and civilians, in the back 
of the ambulance. At one point we had five 
patients in the back of the ambulance, and he was 
standing and he asked me if I wanted to go to the 
hospital with him. I told him no, I needed to 
stay in the area. I wanted to see if Chief 
Goldfarb needed me for anything. So he said 
okay, and he started to leave. He proceeded down 
towards like Albany Street, like Liberty and 
Albany, to go to one of the area hospitals; I 
don't remember which one. 

At that time I started walking back up 
towards Vesey Street. I heard three explosions, 
and then we heard like groaning and grinding, and 
tower two started to come down. To the 



K. DARNOWSKI 9 

firefighters and the cops that I was standing 
there with started running northbound on West 
Street and we made a left on Vesey and ran again 
towards North End Avenue where we were having EMS 
triage, and we stopped over there. 

Down that specific street on West 
Street, there wasn't that much debris and smoke 
coming down because Two World Trade Center is 
more or less blocked by the hotel and a couple 
other buildings. It did come down like Liberty 
Street and towards Two World Financial Center and 
towards like the Winter Garden area. 

We ended up just staying there for a 
while till the smoke more or less cleared up. We 
started putting our masks on and stuff like that 
at that time. 

Shortly after that Chief Goldfarb told 
us to go back down towards where we had the 
ambulances staged on Vesey Street and start 
moving the ambulances back more and a little 
north in case tower one fell. 

At that time I encountered Chief Larry 
Mittleman, Chief Fran Pascale, Chief Basile from 
Division 2, and ALS coordinator Louie Cook from 



K. DARNOWSKI 10 

Division 2. I encountered them all at the EMS 
triage we had at North End and Vesey. 

They were at that point -- Chief 
Goldfarb explained my situation to them with my 
fiancee being in tower one, and they were just 
trying to calm me down. I was helping move 
patients. 

We went back to Vesey and West Street 
and started moving the ambulances back towards 
North End more, and then we started going 
northbound on North End towards Murray Street. 
We were moving the triage because we got a report 
of the parking lot in front of the building we 
were in, some of the cars were on fire, and we 
got reports of gas lines that were blown and the 
fire were starting to get to them. So we ended 
up moving the triage initially, and we just 
started heading northbound to Murray Street. 

We got up to Murray Street, and that's 
when -- Murray Street and towards West Street we 
ended up putting the triage just for temporary 
purposes. Then shortly after that tower one 
started to come down. Captain Fenton, I believe, 
was on the scene. He said at that time to just 



K. DARNOWSKI 11 

get in the ambulances and whatever vehicle you 
could get in and just head northbound on West 
Street until you get to Chelsea Piers. 

That's how the triage ended up at 
Chelsea Piers. Everybody just started heading 
northbound. They started -- we were getting over 
the radio, EMS radio, that they started having 
the ambulances staging at the Chelsea Piers. 

Captain Fenton told a lieutenant from 
the Bellevue station that was on the scene to 
take me back to the station, because I could be 
of no use patient care-wise given my situation. 
He told him to take me back to Bellevue station. 
They removed me to Bellevue station. 

Just while I was at Bellevue station, I 
was acting as a liaison between the station 
itself and the emergency department with a couple 
of the other lieutenants there. I'd just seeing 
a couple of the injuries -- I saw the firefighter 
they brought in in cardiac arrest that was hit by 
a civilian that jumped out of one of the 
buildings. 

At that point I still didn't know what 
was going on with my fiancee. I was calling her 



K. DARNOWSKI 12 

sister, calling her mother. Nobody heard 
anything at that point. 

That whole time I had no idea what time 
of day it was or anything like that. They 
removed me to Bellevue station at about 3:00. 
From 3 until 5:30, as I said, I was acting as a 
liaison between the emergency department and the 
station. 

My twin brother is also a paramedic at 
Battalion 20. He brought in a patient to 
Bellevue, so I was talking to him for a while. I 
went back to the station. I called my house to 
see if there were any messages on the answering 
machine, and there was a message from a nurse at 
Brooklyn hospital saying my fiancee was at 
Brooklyn Hospital. She was okay. She was being 
kept for observation. 

At that point I called her sister, and 
her sister was already on her way over to 
Brooklyn Hospital to see her. So then I 
approached the desk lieutenant at that time at 
Bellevue, and I told him the situation. He was 
going to try to get me a ride back to Brooklyn, 
but he said obviously it wouldn't be any time 



K. DARNOWSKI 13 

soon since the events were still unfolding down 
at the World Trade Center. 

I explained to my brother what had 
happened. He said fine. So they just told me to 
continue what I was doing and they would let me 
know about a ride over to Brooklyn. So I was 
continuing acting as a liaison. 

At one point I brought the 
firefighter's equipment that had died back over 
to the emergency department from the station 
because his coworkers from the engine company 
were there requesting his equipment. 

While I was standing outside in the 
emergency ambulance bay, I was talking to my 
brother and another EMT -- I don't recall his 
name at this time -- and I started experiencing 
some chest pain and chest tightness, and I was 
brought into the emergency room. I was treated 
for angina and anxiety. I was subsequently 
admitted to the cardiac care unit over night in 
Bellevue, and I was released at about 6 in the 
morning. 

Just that's what happened to me on 
September 11th. 



K. DARNOWSKI 14 

Q. When you got in to Manhattan and you 
parked down by Carlisle and West, do you recall 
seeing anyone outside from Chief Goldfarb? Do 
you recall seeing any other EMS personnel around 
there that you recognized, or fire personnel? 

A. Offhand? Not offhand initially, not 
down at that time. There was a torso of a human 
that was down over by the hotel by the front of 
Liberty Street that they had blocked off, and I 
saw a couple of police crime scene units there. 
I saw a couple firefighters; I can't recall their 
names or what engine or ladder company or 
battalions they were from. I didn't start seeing 
EMS people until I got up to West and Vesey 
Street. 

I saw NY Cornell ambulances in front. 
I saw Long Island College Hospital in front. I 
saw some Fire Department ambulances in front of 
the hotel and tower one on West Street. A whole 
bunch of fire apparatus and police vehicles. I 
saw what looked like a Fire Department command 
center. I don't exactly know who was there. 

Everybody had their turnout gear on. 
So at that specific time, it was kind of hard to 



K. DARNOWSKI 15 

differentiate who had white shirt, light blue 
shirts, you know, who was just wearing turnout 
coats. 

Like I said, I ended up seeing EMS 
people from up here, Battalion 20, from New York 
Hospital that I recognized, some names being 
Craig Viscuti, Chris Attanasio and Roland Diaz 
from up here at Battalion 20, Joe Fortis and Mike 
Negron from up here at Battalion 20. I saw an 
EMT by the name of Steven Hess. I believe he's 
from Battalion 57 or the old Woodhall station 
down in Brooklyn. 

At that specific time, I don't remember 
seeing any EMS lieutenants or captains, just 
Chief Goldfarb at that time. Other than that, I 
really couldn't tell you any names. 

Q. You've basically covered everything we 
were looking for. Any thoughts or comments you'd 
like to add, opinion? 

A. No, not really. In that type of 
situation other than the word "chaos" describing 
it all, all in all everybody more or less did 
what they were supposed to do. The firefighters 
did what they were supposed to do. They were 



K. DARNOWSKI 16 

supposed to go in the building and try to rescue 
the people from the fire floors, extinguish the 
fires as best they can. EMS people staging 
outside, some in the lobbies of tower one and 
tower two; I knew that. 

I mean, other than the chaotic scene 
that was going on, I would have to say everybody 
more or less did what an emergency action plan 
recommends with regards to a mess. Obviously 
nobody thought the buildings would fall. That 
was unexpected. 

What was expected was firefighters were 
going to go up to the floors, rescue civilians, 
as many as they can, extinguish the fires, then 
we would treat and transport. Basically that was 
the emergency action plan that was in effect, and 
was what everybody expected to happen. Nobody 
expected the towers to fall. 

So other than that, basically everybody 
did what they were supposed to be doing. With 
the chaos, I'm actually surprised. I was the 
only one that was actually a little bonkers. 
Q. How's your fiancee? 
A. She's okay. She's doing good. She's 



K. DARNOWSKI 17 

hanging in there. She hasn't gone back to work 
yet. Her work actually relocated, but she hasn't 
gone back to work yet. But that's okay. 

MR. RADENBERG: Okay. The time is now 
0954, and the interview is concluded. 



File No. 9110203 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

EMT LONNIE PENN 

Interview Date: November 9, 2001 



Transcribed by Elisabeth F. Nason 



L. PENN 

MR. RADENBERG: Today's date is November 9, 
2001. The time is now 0851 hours. I'm Paul 
Radenberg of the Fire Department of the City of 
New York. 

Q. Conducting an interview with -- 
A. EMT Penn, first name Lonnie. Shield 1296. 
Q. Lonnie is currently assigned to EMS Battalion 
20. This interview is being conducted at Battalion 20 
regarding the events of September 11, 2001. 

A. Particularly on that day, I was working the 
unit 20 David, Tour 1, and approximately two minutes 
after the first plane hit, I was assigned -- basically 
the route I took was down the Bruckner to the FDR all 
the way downtown. I must have been around 23 Street 
when the second plane hit. Shortly, within another 5 
to 10 minutes, I was in the mix. I got waved all the 
way in to the front of the staging. Immediately got 
out, and proceeded to put on my helmet, pulled out a 
stretcher and prepared for an MCI. 

After that, I helped one lady out of the 
front of the Marriott entrance, I recall. I was on my 
way back. I had actually brought her to the Hatzolah 
ambulance, because they were carrying her, and a few 
other people and I assisted with her. Then on my way 



L. PENN 

back to the entrance, I felt the ground shake, I turned 
around and ran for my life. 

I made it as far as the Financial Center, 
like right before it, behind the last Hatzolah 
ambulance facing the Trade Center, when the collapse 
happened, and I mean it was just -- I can't -- it was 
sheer hell, but hell fire passed me and all the rubble, 
at least 10 feet of rubble had passed me. The only 
thing I was really scared of was dying of respiratory 
distress at that point. 

When I got up and looked around, my ambulance 
was obliterated and gone. I looked for my partner. I 
didn't see him. I was worried for him. Basically I 
only saw two other people alive on the block that I was 
at. I got myself together and then started heading 
through towards the water and I saw two other 
co-workers from station 22. We all hugged and I saw 
Captain DeShore and then a boat came in from New Jersey 
police harbor patrol and Captain DeShore was ordering 
us to get on and two of us did and one stayed behind. 

While I was in the mix of helping people get 
on, the second collapse proceeded. We got covered in 
all of the smoke again, all of a sudden and we just 
escaped with our lives. It was close, very close. 



L. PENN 



I just got to say I thank God for living. 
Basically that's it. 

Q. Okay. Do you remember where you staged? 

A. Approximately -- would this line right here 
be the barrier that was there? There was a barrier in 
the middle of the street. 

Q. Yes, the black line. This is West Street and 
then the West Side Highway. 

A. I was more or less right on this corner. 

Q. Right on Liberty and West? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Okay. Who was your partner that day? 

A. A rookie gentleman by the name of Joseph 
Henderson or Henderson Joseph. Basically, we got out 
and we passed a lot of body parts. I mean it looked 
like Beirut to me. That was from the debris of the two 
crashes. My rookie partner, he was in shock, he 
couldn't believe it. He froze. I just you know, I 
couldn't stop, I couldn't even watch. If you looked up 
and you see people jumping, we saw a few jumpers. I 
couldn't look no more. I had to act. I went to the 
front. That was where I went over to like the Marriott 
front . 

I assisted that lady to the Hatzolah 



L. PENN 

ambulance and was on my way back when we felt the 
rumble. My partner actually came sort of like running 
up to me but not all the way. What should I do. I 
just said go get a long board from the ambulance and 
that was the last I saw of him. We felt the ground 
shake. You could see the towers sway and then it just 
came down and I never looked back once I started 
running. 

Q. When the collapse started you ran north on 
the West Side Highway? 

A. No, I jumped the barrier and I must have made 
it right over to where this second line is here. 
Because I was -- there is like -- it was a little high, 
I remember where I was it was 10 feet of rubble had 
passed me. 

Q. You were pretty much in front of like 2 World 
Financial Center? 

A. Yes, that's as far as I got. 

Q. Right. Then -- 

A. I actually saw a police officer shoot the 
window out to get through. 

Q. To get through 2 World Financial Center? 

A. Yes. Because he was ahead of me. I could 
see him. He shot the glass out and jumped through and 



L. PENN 

I had later saw him in the hospital in Jersey. 

Q. When you reached the yacht harbor behind 2 
Financial, you said Captain DeShore was there and two 
other people from -- 

A. Two other EMTs from Boston Road. 

Q. Do you know who they were? 

A. My friend Conzo and Billy -- I can't 
pronounce Billy's last name. Truoccolo, yes. 

Q. Okay. So you were all pretty much back here 
for the second collapse? 

A. Yes. 

Q. At the harbor. Who got on the boat? 

A. Captain DeShore. We assisted a fireman that 
had possibly a broken back. This guy, they already had 
him on a long board and was carrying him over. I 
assisted to help get him on the boat. There was about 
two other police officers and I think two civilian 
ladies, two ladies, I think they were civilians. We 
assisted them downstairs into the boat. I came back up 
and it was me and Conzo, Truoccolo was very hurt, his 
leg was gashed. He had a load of glass all over him, 
over his neck. He was cut up. I guess his adrenaline 
just kept him going. 

Q. Right. 



L. PENN 

A. Basically at that point it was me and Conzo 
on the deck and Captain DeShore was saying get on this 
boat and Conzo says to me, are you going to Jersey or 
what? I said -- I could just hear Captain DeShore 
screaming out again, get on this boat and then all of a 
sudden we hear the second collapse coming and that was 
it. I jumped on it, Conzo stayed and thank God later 
that night I heard he was okay. 

We all got treated very nice as soon as we 
got to Jersey. The people from Day Tech were the 
best. The firemen were there, on the other side of 
Jersey. They hosed me down, all that soot. I was 
coughing, throwing up. I had soot in my - - my eyes 
were burning, they were sheer burning. I can't forget 
that. 

When I was running from the first collapse, I 
must have got hit by a body part because I had carcass 
like on the side of my leg. It was stuck to my pants. 
Basically minor injuries as far as back spasm after 
that and my leg had a bruise. I had a bruise from 
getting hit from some debris. That's basically it. 

Q. Okay. Billy Truocollo got on the boat? 

A. Yes. 

Q. And Conzo? 



L. PENN 

A. Stayed. 

Q. He stayed back? 

A. Yes. 

Q. When you arrived at the staging area, do you 
remember who was there as far as EMS officers, 
personnel? 

A. The last known must have been -- it was a 
Captain or somebody of ours had a vehicle over here 
between Albany and Carlyle. There was someone in that 
vicinity that I recall passing one of my bosses. 
Otherwise it was strictly Fire Department personnel, 
fire trucks just waving me in. I had got waved in, I 
remember I passed this bridge here and I was coming in 
on this side and then I made this turn, right here was 
the turn where I made and I parked it right here 
because I was on that side. 

Q. You turned around the barriers, the Jersey 
barriers? 

A. Yes. 

Q. By the Marriott and then parked on the east 
side of West Side Highway so you came up this side on 
the west side. 

A. That's when I got waved to turn. 

Q. Turn around. 



L. PENN 

A. Like I said as soon as I stepped off the 
ambulance I mean I was just -- I felt like I was in 
Beirut. All I saw was debris and body parts. I recall 
a little girl's foot. It was like a pink sneaker. It 
was tiny, around the age of seven, eight or so, because 
I have a daughter that size. I mean I just saw so many 
body parts, it was unbelievable. 

Then I look up and see people jumping. 
Really bugged me out, because I couldn't even watch 
them land. It was just -- I just couldn't understand 
jumping. I mean I just couldn't fathom it. I would 
rather take my chances and ride it out. But these 
people were like I would rather jump than get burned. 
That's how I thought of it afterwards. I don't know 
what else to say. 

Q. Anything else you would like to add, opinions 
or - - 

A. My opinion was that staging was way too 
close. I got waved all the way into the front. Where 
it was unnecessary that personally there was nothing I 
could do to help anybody from what I saw you know, as 
far as -- evacuation yes, but that's not my job. So I 
mean I still assisted in that sense. I just had to 
act. I couldn't watch these people jump off any more. 



10 

L. PENN 



I had to do something. That's when I went to the foot 
of the Marriott entrance and just assisted the first 
lady I could help. They were all leading them to the 
Hatzolah. There was a line of like Hatzolah ambulances 
I recall, at least 4 or 5, and we were helping them. 

Q. Okay -- 

A. That was actually on this side where like 
two, it was over there. 

Q. On the west side? 

A. Yes, that's where -- 

Q. The Hatzolah? 

A. Yes, they were faced with their ambulances 
backed up right there. 

Q. Right. 

A. So then we had to go -- it was actually by 
the turn, that's how I remember too. It was by the 
turn, where I did my turn was across there. We had 
started walking up over here, me and my partner, I 
guess we were like right on this corner here. 

Q. On Liberty and Washington? 

A. Yes, and that's when I saw somebody jump on 
this side of this 2 World Trade Center on the top on 
this corner. I saw a man take a leap. I mean I have 
done a lot of jumpers down, but this one was live in 



11 

L. PENN 



your face. I must have stopped watching when he got to 
around the 30th floor. I just put my head down and 
said lord take care of me and I reacted. That's when 
my rookie partner, and there was two other medics from 
Boston that showed up. Joe Jefferson and I forgot his 
partner, but I heard his partner fractured his shoulder 
and it was just one bad day. 

It was such a beautiful day. Nobody expected 
this. I had a funny feeling in my gut that once those 
planes had hit, that the World Trade Center was going 
to collapse. I had a feeling it was coming down. I 
just didn't think so quick. It was within minutes. 

Q. One last thing. The last time that you saw 
your partner, he was -- 

A. He was at the ambulance. 

Q. Just prior to the first collapse? 

A. Yes, yes. He was getting a long board, he 
was like what should I do? I said I -- it's like 
telling a husband and I'm helping his wife give birth 
like, he don't know -- 

Q. Go boil the water. 

A. I just said go get a long board. That's what 
he was doing. Basically after the first collapse and I 
look back to where my ambulance was parked, it was no 



12 
L. PENN 



longer there. It was gone. I couldn't even see it. 
It was obliterated. Thank God it was one of the spare 
vehicles. That's what -- everybody at -- like the 
bosses, said ah, it ' s a spare. 

I got to thank the New Jersey harbor police. 
I mean they -- he did a hell of a job getting out of 
that situation blindly during the second collapse. He 
got it backed up, did a little bump, hit the wall and 
then swung it right out. I mean blindly, because you 
couldn't see anything. The soot was hitting us already 
from the second collapse. Just covered the boat. 
Fortunately we made it out of there. 

I remember on the boat at that moment, 
though, I had to grab a fireman on the long board down 
the stairs. I just hope I didn't hurt him any further, 
but I just reacted so quickly. 

Q. You pulled him down into the cabin of the 
boat? 

A. Yes, he was on the deck and I pulled him 
down. There was a little bump. 

Q. Right. 

A. You know, otherwise he would have died of 
respiratory distress, because he couldn't move. He was 
definitely temporarily paralyzed from the legs down. 



13 
L. PENN 



The Jersey City harbor guy didn't realize when he drove 
in, he tied it up, so during that moment in a split 
second, I mean this guy did it like a real naval 
seaman, he spun it and we got out of there. 

Him and his partner were frantic. You could 
see the panic in him when we couldn't see anything in 
the harbor. All the dust was just covering our faces. 
My shirt was already gone, because I couldn't even 
breathe no more from the first collapse. I took it 
off. Just took my shirt off. It was -- couldn't do 
nothing for me any more. 

I remember I went into the bathroom after I 
helped the fireman down. I went into the little 
bathroom cabin and it got full, full of smoke and the 
soot and what was on my mind then was I just thought, 
just prayed to God this wasn't chemical warfare also. 

When I got to Jersey, like I said, I was 
throwing up black soot, chunks, chunks. The firemen 
hosed me down. By then I practically just had my pants 
tucked in my boots. Oh, man. I don't know what else 
to say. 

Everybody at Day Tech was great. I mean they 
were there. They had tons of water, food, whatever you 
wanted. I was just devastated sitting there, watching 



14 
L. PENN 



you know, it just burn, dying. It was 10 o'clock in 
the morning and I was on the Jersey side and we're 
right there watching it burn, I just couldn't believe 
it. 

Sat there for about two hours in shock till a 
guy came over to me and he don't know me, didn't -- you 
know, just gave me a hug. It was really a touching 
moment. He gave me a hug. I didn't expect. Just a 
lot of support on that side. Then we saw the F 16s 
coming and fly overhead and stuff like that. Then the 
Jersey City harbor police did a phenomenal job. Back 
and forth and we were assisting -- I was helping assist 
them. 

We were all walking people also from -- as 
soon as they landed from the harbor patrol pier -- the 
plane, one piece there, helping people get off the boat 
until about 12:30, when a lady from the hospital came 
up to me and said you are crazy, you got to go to the 
hospital already. She said I seen you down here since 
you got here. You just don't stop. I said all right. 
I was like you know, I guess my adrenaline was wearing 
down now. 

I finally went to the hospital and I saw 
Captain DeShore a few hours after and she had a burnt 



15 
L. PENN 



cornea, something was wrong. We just happened to see 
each other in line. I mean even at the hospital they 
were excellent. They treated us like we were -- any 
complaint. Each one by one, a specialist came over. 

It was just one crazy day. I mean I kind of 
say it's all in a day's work, but that you will never 
forget. This is a time line in history. 

Q. Yes. 

A. We all have to endure. 

Q. One last question. When you were on the 
Jersey side, aside from the people that you went over 
with, after that, the subsequent trips by Jersey 
harbor, do you remember anybody else from EMS or the 
Fire Department being brought over before you went to 
the hospital yourself? 

A. Actually no. I don't recall seeing anybody 
that I particularly knew from EMS. The rest of it was 
none of our guys. It was other civilians from the area 
you know, the financial area, and some civilians made 
it. They were over by the water. After, it just kept 
going. It kept going back and forth. It was the only 
way to get out of there. I mean if I could have I 
would have swam right up the Hudson all the way to 
Co-op City where I live. I wanted to go home, but I 



16 



L. PENN 



got to say, what's this guy's name, from the Police 
Department, New Jersey, what do you call it, the 
chaplain, he arranged a charter bus for us to get home, 
me and Captain DeShore. We dropped off people 
throughout the boroughs, going back once. This was 
late at night already. 

Then you know, we got a police escort. They 
were really good. I just thank God again for me 
living. It was a tremendous tragedy. That's about it 



Paul. 



Q. Anything else you want to add? 
A. No. 

MR. RADENBERG: All right, thank you. Time 
is now 0916. The interview is concluded. 



File No. 9110204 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

EMT-D CHRISTOPHER ATTANASIO 

Interview Date: November 9, 2001 



Transcribed by Elisabeth F. Nason 



C. ATTANASIO 

MR. RADENBERG: Today is November 8, 2001. 
I'm Paul Radenberg of the Fire Department of the 
City of New York. The time is now 0631 hours. 
Q. I'm conducting an interview with -- 
A. Christopher Attanasio, EMT-D, 5303, Battalion 
20, Division 2. 

Q. This interview is being conducted at EMS 
Battalion 20 regarding the events of September 11, 
2001. Christopher, start from when you were assigned 
to the job. 

A. We signed on to the KDT approximately about 
8:30. At approximately 8:48 or 8:50, the dispatcher 
came up and said I need whoever wants to go to the 
World Trade Center, I have something going on. Just 
switch to Citywide. So my partner and myself switched 
to Citywide with vehicle 85 and proceeded to go down to 
the World Trade Center. 

We took the FDR Drive south. There was a lot 
of traffic on the drive going south. We decided to get 
off on 96 Street, which would cut across to 2nd Avenue 
and we took 2nd Avenue all the way down. 

Upon arrival, towers one and two were both 
ablaze. The second plane had hit the second tower 
already. Both towers were totally engulfed. People 



C. ATTANASIO 

were jumping out of the buildings. There was airplane 
fuselage and landing gear around the site. Body parts, 
victims' remains on the floor. There were some 
injuries on the street. Some cars were on fire. 

I pulled over. I was directed to stage at 
Liberty and West, where I saw Captain DeShore, Chief 
Villani, my partner Roland Diaz, 03 John, Joey Fortez, 
and Mike Negron. Different agencies, voluntary 
agencies, ESL), Fire Department, Customs, Secret 
Service, Port Authority people, Hatzolah, and we were 
staging and Chief Villani had told us to get our 
equipment out of the vehicle because they were going to 
go into the first tower that was hit, because they were 
getting reports of casualties. 

So we proceeded to the ambulance, put on our 
turnout gear, helmet and turnout coat, and as we were 
taking the equipment out of the ambulance, the second 
tower -- the second tower, started to come down. As 
the tower was coming down, we ran. I ran, I guess it 
was west to the West Side Highway. The tower came 
down. I grabbed my partner, we ran. 

When the tower finally came down, there was a 
white cloud of smoke that hit us, knocked us to our 
feet. It was very hard to breathe. We inhaled a lot 



C. ATTANASIO 

of white powder, whatever it was, dust, concrete, 
whatever it was. 

After the building fell, I remember seeing 
Chief Pascale, her aide, her name is Immaculada, Gattas 
is her last name. I remember running with her. Total 
chaos from the scene. An ESU guy coming out covered 
from feet, head to toe, bleeding from his head. We 
treated him. People started just -- we were able to -- 
after the building fell we went back and rescued our 
ambulance. Vehicle 85, which had been struck with 
pieces of the building, had a broken left mirror, 
broken windshield, debris on it. We cleared it off. 

We went back to where they were staging by 
Battery City and we went back, I went back to the tower 
that had come down, but a gentleman from OEM, who is a 
black male, that's all I remember, a very big black 
male, he had told us that his boss was in the 
building. We proceeded to go back to the tower that 
was already down and when we pulled up, we saw burnt 
vehicles, fire balls, smoke, debris, dust, bodies. 

When we went in front of the tower, I 
remember a Chief saying on his bull horn, all Fire 
Department personnel, abandon your vehicles. I looked 
up, tower one was still burning, but tower two was 



C. ATTANASIO 

already down. I told my partner Roland Diaz, and I had 
another paramedic in the back, Darnowski, Steve 
Darnowski, was in the back of vehicle 85. As we looked 
around, we saw nobody. It was a ghost town, everybody 
had left. 

I put the vehicle in reverse, people started 
coming out of the woodwork. We had an injured firemen, 
we had a lady, a guy having a heart attack. We had 
another fireman with an avulsed face. We had some 
paraplegic lady that they had carried down, all the way 
down, and they left her on the street, but she wasn't 
injured. She just needed transportation out of the 
site. 

We had a total of 13 patients in the back of 
the ambulance, ranging from cuts and burns and scrapes 
and bruises, to some lady having -- she was having an 
MI, blunt trauma, a lot of people with difficulty 
breathing, so we notified the dispatcher. I was 3 Ida 
that day, that we had injuries in front of tower two 
and asked for direction on what hospital to go to. 

The dispatcher came back and replied take 
your patients to Columbia Presbyterian. I acknowledged 
and as I was leaving the site I picked up a rider, some 
gentleman that just wanted to get out of this. I put 



C. ATTANASIO 

him in the front of the bus. As we are going up the 
highway, as we are going up 9 West or whatever you want 
to call it, the patient's condition started getting 
worse in the back, the fireman, he was really bleeding 
now, so we diverted him over to hospital 19, which is 
St. Clare's. 

When we got there, we were met by several 
EMTs, who took very good care of us and took all the 
patients out. We restocked the bus and went back down 
to Ground Zero. We just went past Chelsea Piers. We 
had gotten a couple of more patients and took them to 
Beekman Hospital. Same thing, cuts, bruises, scrapes, 
respiratory problems. 

After coming out of Beekman Hospital, we 
reported to the Chelsea Piers. Basically that's the 
best of my knowledge that I can remember. 

Q. Okay. When you got down, coming down Second 
Avenue, when you got into the neighborhood of the Trade 
Center complex, do you remember what route you took to 
get to Liberty and West? 

A. Right. I definitely went right by City Hall, 
right where J and R Records is, and I cut across. I 
was following another EMS ambulance who knew Manhattan, 
because he was zipping in and out, so I was just 



C. ATTANASIO 



following him. I was directed when I came, I came all 
the way around, and I cut this way. 

Q. Again, down Church and Liberty? 

A. Church, and I guess I'm making a right on 
Liberty, and these are where the busses were, on this 
side. 

Q. Liberty and Washington roughly and the West 
Side Highway? 

A. Right, right. 

Q. Do you remember what the number on the 
vehicle you were following by any chance? 

A. No, I don't. 

Q. There wasn't anybody following -- 

A. FDNY. 

Q. But it wasn't from Battalion 20? 

A. Negative. 

Q. When you got to Liberty and West, you said 
you saw Captain DeShore. Chief Villani was down here? 

A. Yes, he was. 

Q. At the site? 

A. Yes, he was. 

Q. Do you remember seeing any other EMS 
personnel or officers down there? 

A. Officers, no. 



C. ATTANASIO 

Q. Any fire personnel, Fire Department personnel 
that you recognized? 

A. Joe Truocolla, he works 18 Charlie, tour 2. 
He got injured, I think he works out of Boston. 22. 
I'm not sure. Who else did I see down there. I can't 
remember . 

Q. Okay. 

A. I don't remember. I don't remember. Just my 
partner Roland Diaz, Joey Fortez I remember seeing. 
Mike Negron. Chief Pascale. Oh, Steve Pillar. I saw 
Steve Pillar too. 

Q. He is the ALS coordinator? 

A. Coordinator for Division 6. 

Q. Okay. When tower number two started coming 
down, you said you ran west across the West Side 
Highway? 

A. Right. 

Q. Do you remember where you wound up in that 
area? 

A. It was right before Battery City. It was 
right -- let's see -- I ran this way. We ran all the 
way. I couldn't tell you. I don't remember. I just 
-- it was -- I couldn't recognize anything, the wave 
of white. I couldn't see. I don't remember. 



C. ATTANASIO 

Q. Okay. 

A. I don't remember. 

Q. No problem. You said you had come back after 
the dust settled a little bit? 

A. We went back to get the ambulance. 

Q. To get your vehicle? 

A. Right. 

Q. Do you remember where you moved the vehicle 
to at that point? 

A. The vehicles were staged on Liberty, so we 
went to West Street, where I picked up that gentleman I 
told you. We went back, because he said, he worked for 
OEM. I remember that much. I remember that. We went 
back and I don't, you know -- 

Q. You got out somewhere on to West Street, West 
Side Highway and then -- 

A. After getting the vehicles and going back to 
the downed tower and coming back I had proceeded north 
on West Street, on the West Side Highway. I know 
that's how I got to the hospital. 

Q. Okay. Do you remember approximately when you 
came out of St. Clare's the first trip? 

A. What time? 

Q. Do you remember approximately or do you know 



10 

C. ATTANASIO 



at that point had the second tower -- 

A. Had fallen. 

Q. Tower one had come down? 

A. Tower one? To what I believe, I believe that 
while I was in the hospital, that's when the second 
tower fell. I wasn't there for the second tower. I 
had already picked up injuries from tower two, which 
was the first tower that fell. That's how I would have 
to believe it. Because I never saw the second tower 
fall. I never saw it. I only saw the first tower 
fall. 

Q. When you came back from St. Clare's back down 
to the site, did you come down the West Side Highway? 

A. I went all the way down the West Side Highway 
and I made a left. I just cut across and I was just 
following some emergency vehicles. I think it was ESU 
or Port Authority ESU, and I just went back and we just 
picked up some more patients. There were just patients 
everywhere. 

Q. Do you remember where in the area you got to? 

A. I think it was down as close as maybe Church 
and Rector, if that's possible. Maybe. We just -- we 
were getting flagged down by people and we were just 
piling them in the ambulance. There was no -- we 



11 

C. ATTANASIO 



weren't told. We were just coming back. As we were 
coming back down, I think I made a left and cut across 
somewhere, and we just started getting flagged by 
people walking that were covered in debris during the 
towers. 

Q. Okay. Any thoughts or comments you would 
like to add? 

A. Thoughts and comments? No, I was just -- I 
just -- you know. I have been through a lot of stuff 
in my own personal life, but I never seen anything like 
that. I am a Persian Gulf War veteran and I have never 
seen anything like this before in my life, and I still 
to this day can't believe it. I just can't believe it, 
that it happened. Basically that's all. 

MR. RADENBERG: Okay. Time is now 0644 
hours. The interview is concluded. Thank you 
Chris. Point of correction. This interview is 
conducted November 9, Friday. The time is 
correct . 



File No. 9110209 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMT-P KATHY ZARR 
Interview Date: November 27, 2001 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



K. ZARR 2 

MR. RADENBERG: Today is November 27th, 
2001. I'm Paul Radenberg with the Fire 
Department, City of New York. The time is 
now 0656 hours. I am conducting an 
interview with -- 

EMT ZARR: Kathryn Zarr, paramedic, 
Battalion 22, Station 52. 

MR. RADENBERG: This interview is being 
conducted regarding the events of September 
11th, 2001. Also present for the interview 
is - - 

MR. SAMOJEDNY: Eugene Samojedny, Fire 
Department, City of New York. 

MR. RADENBERG: This interview is being 
conducted at EMS Battalion 22. 
Q. Kathy, if you can start from when you 
were assigned to the job. 

A. We're stationed out here in Staten 
Island, and when the first plane hit they 
mobilized some of the units to go out to 
Manhattan. I guess that's part of their preplan 
for MCIs. 

While we were in the tunnel on the way 
there, the second plane had hit, and we didn't 



K. ZARR 3 

know it until we pulled out of the tunnel and 
somebody had advised us later on that the second 
plane hit . 

They told us to put our vehicle on 
Liberty Avenue right by West Street, right on the 
corner there, and set up a secondary triage area 
because they were expecting burn patients and 
everything else. So we parked our vehicle, and 
behind the building there was an alcove. We set 
up all of our equipment as far as a triage area. 

So after that was done, we were just 
hanging out, waiting to see what was going to 
happen next or when we were going to get any 
patients. 

I know Chief Grant was there from 
Battalion 22 on that corner with us. His aide 
was there. There was some units also here from 
Staten Island, but they were the voluntary units. 
I think one was from Bayley Seton and one from 
St. Vincent's, I believe, and a Richmond County 
ambulance, one of the private ambulettes out 
here. For some reason they sent a truck up there 
as well. 

Once that was done, like I said, we 



K. ZARR 4 

were just hanging out, not really doing much of 
anything. We were watching the buildings and 
watching the people jumping from the buildings. 
The next thing you know, we heard this rumble, we 
looked up and tower two was coming down. 

We were able to run maybe half a block 
before we got overtaken by the debris cloud. I 
lost my partner and most of the other people 
there, and I got thrown into one of the alcoves 
of the building from the wave. 

After a few minutes of hanging out in 
blackness, I figured I had to start walking to 
try to get at least oriented. I found a fireman. 
He was nice enough to give me a couple hits off a 
Scott pack to try to get some air at least. I 
don't know if you were there during any of this. 
Q. No, not that morning. 
A. It was like breathing sand. You 
couldn't catch a breath at all. 

Once I got that, I turned around, found 
my ambulance again. I had to turn back, and you 
actually had to be on top of the truck before you 
could actually see any of the numbers. That's 
how black it was. You couldn't see your hand in 



K. ZARR 5 

front of your face. 

I took all the respirator masks we have 
M-95s. I took them all out of the truck, put one 
on myself and just went back out and trying to 
find everybody again and just pass them out to 
whomever you could find. 

I found one captain. I don't remember 
her name. I started finding the people that we 
went down there with. Just handed out whoever 
didn't have a mask, handed out masks. As we were 
trying to find out equipment, get everything 
reorganized again, the next tower came down. 

We got overcome by the debris cloud 
again, wound up at the end of -- I'm not sure if 
it's West End Street where the water hits it. I 
wound up down there with a whole bunch of 
civilians. I took out whatever 02 tanks we had 
from the truck, put it inside one of the 
buildings that they opened up for us, and just 
started treating the asthmatics or whatever else 
found their way down there. 

Then they evacuated the area because of 
the gas leak, and they started dumping everybody 
on harbor boats. 



K. ZARR 6 

Q. Right. 

A. Well, they wanted to take us over to 
Jersey. I knew there was a triage area over in 
Manhattan, the ferry. 

Q. Right, Battery Park. 

A. Yeah. My brother happens to be a 
harbor pilot, so the guy was nice enough to 
transport me to the ferry instead of to Jersey. 

So we made our way over there with 
whatever 02 tanks we could carry, and I wound up 
over at the south ferry, treating whoever came in 
over there. I don't remember what time I got 
there. It was well after the second collapse and 
after they started evacuating people for some 
sort of gas leak. 

Q. Who was your partner that day? 

A. Mark Harris. 

Q. Mark Harris. 

When you went into Manhattan, you said 
you went through the tunnel. You went through 
the Battery Tunnel? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Do you remember how you came up? 

A. We made a right-hand turn, and all you 



K. ZARR "i 

saw was airplane parts and body parts in the 
street . 

Q. You were coming up north on West Side 
Highway? 

A. Yes. We made a left onto Liberty, and 
we ended up I believe it was right here, because 
I remember the street that we were on. They 
parked us on the corner on Liberty, but I 
remember the street we were on. We drove down 
the street to get away from anything else that 
might have happened as far as the debris cloud 
and stuff. It was a dead end. We drove 
ourselves into a dead end, and that's where the 
water was. 

Q. Okay. That was probably coming down 
here South End Avenue? 

A. Yeah. 

Q. So your staging area was on Liberty 
between West and South? 

A. Right. 

Q. You said you had seen Chief Grant. 

A. And his aide Mary. 

Q. And his aide. Do you remember seeing 
any other EMS personnel at that triage area? 



K. ZARR 8 

A. Yeah, but I don't know who they were. 
They left me to set up the area while they were 
doing other things, because it was a secondary 
area and they knew they had another one set up I 
think in front of the building or in the lobby of 
the building itself. So what they were going to 
do was use us as the secondary point. So they 
left me with -- 

MR. RADENBERG: The interview is 

paused . 

(Interruption. ) 

MR. RADENBERG: The time is now 0827 

hours. We are resuming the interview. All 

parties indicated at the beginning of the 

tape are present. 

Q. So triage was here on Liberty between 
South End and West. When the tower collapsed or 
the first tower two collapsed, do you remember 
which way you went at that point, who was with 
you? 

A. I had one of the girls from Richmond 
County ambulance with me. Where everybody else 
went, I have no idea. Everybody just started 
scattering. I had to stop because she had 



K. ZARR 9 

fallen. I picked her up. As I did that, that 
cloud just came around the corner. So I think we 
were running on End Avenue. Which end? 

Q. That's South End. 

A. South End. We were running this way. 

Q. South. 

A. Right. I made it not even half a block 
before that cloud caught up. She wound up diving 
under a city bus, and there was an alcove. The 
pressure of the cloud pushed me into the alcove. 
So that's where I wound up. 

Q. Do you have any idea where your partner 
was at this point? 

A. None whatsoever. None whatsoever. 

Q. When you first arrived on the scene and 
was setting up the triage area, was he still -- 

A. Yeah, he was driving that day, so he 
was positioning the ambulance and stuff while I 
was positioning all the equipment. I guess I had 
most of the techs from the different trucks, 
whatever the techs were that day. We were all 
setting up inside with the chairs and stuff. We 
were trying to set up in case we got a lot of 
patients and stuff. 



K. ZARR 10 

Q. So basically as far as you know through 
the first collapse Mark was still at the vehicle? 

A. Yeah, I had no idea where he was after 
that first collapse. I had no idea where he 
went. After the collapse, like I said, it took a 
minute for me to find where everything was. But 
I went back to the vehicle to get those masks, 
and there was nobody there. The back door of the 
vehicle, it was open. So there was like soot and 
debris and stuff all inside the truck and 
everything else. 

But I had no idea where he was. It 
took a while for the dust to settle, literally 
for the dust to settle, for us to even see and to 
try to find everybody. After a while I did find 
him and see him and then lost him again when the 
second collapse happened. 

Q. In between the two collapses when you 
found him, where were you? 

A. Trying to find all our equipment. We 
were back to where -- 

Q. Back at triage? 

A. Back to where the triage was. We went 
back to try to find all the equipment. Because 



K. ZARR 11 

the first building came down, I didn't think the 
second one is going to come down. I don't know 
why we didn't think so. I guess we didn't want 
to believe it would come down. 

We were trying to find everything to 
reset everything up, because now definitely there 
are going to be a lot of people hurt. 

Q. Right. 

So you found Mark back at the triage 
area. Was he injured at all? 

A. No. None of us were. None of us were, 
which was a surprise. It felt like I had a 
sunburn. It looked like I had a sunburn from all 
the cuts, just the force of -- 

Q. The dust? 

A. -- the dust and stuff. You felt like 
you had glass all over you. Everything was all 
itchy and stuff. It must have been whatever was 
in the cloud. 

Q. Now, when the second building came 
down, do you remember which -- I guess you and 
Mark split up again or? 

A. No, he jumped into the vehicle. He had 
a fireman with him in the back of the truck, 



K. ZARR 12 

trying to get the vehicle out of there. We 
caught him just before we took off with the 
vehicle. 

So I had somebody else who had escaped, 
one of the guys who had escaped from the first 
collapse. He worked in that building. He was 
also -- I teach EMTs out here on the island. He 
was one of my students, so I knew he was an EMT. 
He wanted to help. I said, "Okay. Stay with me. 
I don't know what's going to go on." He got into 
the back of the truck, and we ended up down by 
that water. 

Q. This way? 

A. Yeah, down here, which was only like 
two or three blocks. I didn't even realize it 
was a dead end. That's how much I know 
Manhattan. We ended up down at the end of the 
dead end. 

Q. The south end of South End Avenue at 
South Cove Park is where it dead ends. 

Mark was with you? He was driving the 
truck at that point? 

A. Right there, yeah. At that point he 
was there. 



K. ZARR 13 

The cloud caught up to us. There was 
no getting away from that. But I took whatever 
oxygen tanks we had there, and there was a 
building that they had, they were doing 
construction on one of the buildings, and the guy 
opened it up. 

So all of the civilians and stuff that 
had congregated around there went into the 
building, whatever had to have their eyes washed. 
The guy was very nice. He just opened everything 
up for everybody. We threw some oxygen tanks in 
there. We had a couple of asthmatics that were 
having asthma attacks. We were treating them 
with whatever equipment we had left. 

Then they started evacuating everybody 
because of a gas leak, and that's where I totally 
lost Mark and I don't know where he went. It was 
just weird. 

Q. So it was from this area, from South 
Cove - - 

A. South Cove. 

Q. -- that you got on the boat? 
A. I got on the boat on the Manhattan side 
of the ferry terminal where the triage and 



K. ZARR 14 

treatment area was. 

Q. The firefighter that was in the back of 
the truck -- there was a firefighter with Mark? 

A. Yeah. 

Q. But you don't know who he was or what 
company or anything like that? 

A. No, no. 

Q. When you made your way down here to 
South Cove now, do you recall, aside from you and 
Mark, any other EMS personnel being down there? 

A. Yes. There was a Staten Island 
University Hospital ambulance there. It was 
Mitch Powell and Danny Frazier. They emptied out 
their 02 tanks and gave them to me too. Like I 
said, we only had the two that were left from the 
truck because all our gear is buried now wherever 
the treatment area was all the way down by the 
towers. So they gave us whatever they had to try 
to help us out, and they were there. I don't 
know what happened to them after that. 

Q. Going back a little bit, before you got 
the job, you had mentioned a female captain. EMS 
captain? 

A. EMS captain. 



K. ZARR 15 

Q. PD? 

A. It was a female EMS captain. She was 
in that area. I don't remember her name. 

Q. That was at the triage area when you 
first got there? 

A. Yes, when I first got there and after 
the first collapse I saw her. I didn't see her 
after the second collapse. I didn't see anybody 
after the second collapse. 

Q. Do you remember what she looked like at 
all? 

A. I just saw her again too, and I don't 
remember her name. I'm bad with names. I don't 
remember her name. She was a blonde, I guess in 
her forties. 

Q. Captain Deshore? 

A. That's it. She was just at that 
function in Manhattan at the hotel. 

Q. That's pretty much if for questions I 
have at this point. Anything else would like to 
add? Opinions? Comments? Anything of that 
nature? 

A. There's no comment. I don't know what 
to say about this. 



K. ZARR 16 

When did you guys start doing the 
interviews? Just recently you started with all 
this? 

Q. A couple weeks ago. 

A. Because I've only been back to work for 
two weeks. 

Q. Yeah. A couple of weeks ago we 
started, probably about a month, actually, maybe 
a month and a half. 

A. Yeah, because I was out sick. I was 
out sick for two months. 

Q. Actually the beginning of October, 
somewhere around there. 

A. I didn't come back to work for about 
two weeks. 

Anything else? 

Q. No, no. 

MR. RADENBERG: The time is now 0837, 

and the interview is concluded. 



File No. 9110213 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMT LINDA MCCARTHY 
Interview Date: November 28, 2001 



Transcribed by Elisabeth F. Nason 



L. MCCARTHY 

MR. CUNDARI: Today's date is November 28, 
2001. I'm George Cundari, working with Murray 
Murad. The time is 12 noon. We are here 
interviewing Linda McCarthy. 
Q. Please state your name, rank and command for 



us. 



A. My full name is Linda McNer McCarthy. That's 
my legal name. My shield is 2259. I'm an EMT and I 
work for communications as a dispatcher. 

Q. Linda, can you please tell us what happened 
in the events of that tragic day of September 11. 

A. Well, I had finished up my 16 hour shift at 
communications at approximately 8 o'clock in the 
morning. Then I went outside, said good-bye to some 
people, got a coffee from I guess the local little -- I 
always get a little coffee in the shed, the little hut 
they have there. I went over to Flatbush Avenue where 
my van was parked. 

Now I don't normally go home when I'm doing 
mutuals. I stay in the city with a friend or 
wherever. Go over to my old station or wherever. So 
this day I was heading up to East 9 Street in Manhattan 
to park my van, alternate side of the street parking, 
and then figure out what I was going to do for the 



L. MCCARTHY 

afternoon. 

I got there probably -- must have been about 
9, in the area, maybe quarter to nine or 20 to nine. 
I'm not quite sure when, but I didn't notice any 
-- first I see the first tower was 8:48. I didn't see 
that going on coming over the Manhattan Bridge, so 
maybe it hadn't happened yet. I think I would have 
noticed it. 

Q. You were going to Manhattan? 

A. No, I was probably in Manhattan at that 
point, coming up Allen or whatever comes off the 
Manhattan Bridge, up to 9 Street and First Avenue. I 
parked my van and I puttered around and was waiting, 
you know, you can't just leave your car parked. I 
heard a boom. I said gee, that's a pretty loud manhole 
cover. I saw people on the corner looking up. I said 
that was pretty close. I can't really leave my van 
there. You are not supposed to leave it until you have 
moved it back to the empty side, whatever. 

So I went down anyway. I saw the smoke. I 
said that looks like the World Trade Center area. 
Someone said that is the World Trade Center, a second 
plane just hit. I said oh, my god. I was still in 
uniform. I said I have to go. I have to go down 



L. MCCARTHY 

there. I parked the van on the -- where you are not 
supposed to park it until 10:30, 10 o'clock. They move 
it over. I just parked it and I said I'm going down. 
I just said oh, if they give me a ticket they give me a 
ticket. I'm going towards Second Avenue. Maybe I will 
get a cab or something. 

I hitched a ride with a Beth Israel 
ambulance. The people on it I didn't recognize. I 
know LoriAnn Wienerman. I know different people. No, 
that's -- Beth Israel is 4 Charlie, but I didn't 
recognize these people. They weren't the young guys I 
see sitting by Tompkin's Square Park once in a while in 
14, I think it is, 14. 

I hitched a ride and a Firefighter jumped on 
too, still putting on his gear coming off duty. They 
drove us down there to Church. 

Q. You can use the diagram to -- 
A. We climbed down off their ambulance at 
Barclay, yes, Barclay and that's not West, West 
Broadway, and ran down towards West Street. I don't 
know where the Firefighter went. He went off into the 
crowd, but we ran together down there. I stopped on 
the corner of West and Vesey. I looked at the burning 
buildings. I said I just have my uniform, my helmet 



L. MCCARTHY 

and my outer coat, you know the one with the shiny 
reflector. I said I don't even know where triage is in 
those two buildings. I wouldn't know where to go. 

But I remember the last bomb when I was an 
office aide at Woodhull, before I became an EMT, I put 
on my little buff coat and went down and there was 
right across the street a triage. I said I'm going 
there, because I know there is probably going to be a 
triage. 

Q. Upon your arrival did you see a lot of 
injuries, a lot of people coming up to you, was there a 
lot of activity going on around you, a lot of 
ambulances? 

A. I was on the side street and I did see a lot 
of ambulances parked up on Barclay, when we ran down 
Barclay, a lot of -- parked at angles, but like Hunter 
and -- you know, different. It wasn't all FDs parked 
there. Right away. I saw people injured but not 
severely injured coming towards me and around there 
people were taking care of them. 

There was a lot of bustling right there on 
that corner. I just had tunnel vision. I said I have 
to get to where I can get some equipment, so I went 
straight there into this building, which is 3 World 



L. MCCARTHY 

Trade Center. Right in the front door. 

Q. By the Winter Garden? 

A. Yes, right to the right of the Winter 
Garden. Right there in the front, there was a triage 
and I said I'm here off duty. I wanted to check in. 
First of all I wanted someone to know I was there and I 
wanted to be able to get an oxygen tank or a stair 
chair or something to help. 

Some people were out front writing a sign. I 
guess they were putting triage or something. I heard 
within 3 minutes or something, this rumbling. Someone 
said the building is going to come down. 

Q. Could you see the towers where you were? 
Were you able to see the towers? 

A. I was right across the street from the 
towers. I couldn't see two, the south tower, very 
well. It was kind of blocked by one. Do you see like 
that? 

Q. Uh-huh. 

A. So when that one went down. I thought the 
plane was exploding, or another plane hit. I had no 
idea it was coming down. But I couldn't see it gone, 
because I couldn't see it really in the first place 
with all the smoke. But I saw debris flying at me like 



L. MCCARTHY 

a hurricane. So I didn't know what it was. I heard 
like an earthquake. I said run for your lives, run. 

Everyone that was around me looked up and we 
all just immediately ran into the building. We were 
running through the hallways, afraid that whatever it 
was was going to blow through the windows and blow down 
the hall. I mean we didn't know (inaudible). 

Q. Who was in the command post at this point? 

A. Nobody that I worked with before. 

Q. No Chiefs, nobody? 

A. Chief, but there was no Lieutenant at that 
point. There were EMTs and paramedics right there. 
Because I was looking for one. Where is the 
Lieutenant? They said well, he's not here right here 
this minute. I'm like okay. What do I do. Count 4 by 
4s. No, you just kind of like see what's around and 
see what you can do with it. Until someone gives me 
direction I didn't know where they wanted us to go. 

So we ran through and we came out the side 
right here. There was -- oh, once I saw it wasn't 
flying through the glass at us, we had run down the 
hallway, I saw some people coming from the stairway, so 
I just kind of stood in front of the stairway and said 
to the right, to the right. I was like totally 



L. MCCARTHY 

petrified, but I was directing them around to the right 
to where the door was that we were all going out. 

So there was a lot of people -- obviously 
there was a triage on the second floor in the front. 
They were coming down and this was about 20 people. So 
I took them out the side. 

Q. When you said they, what do you mean, 
civilians or -- 

A. Civilians and EMTs. We had a triage on the 
second floor too. Then it turns out the door right 
here was open, but maybe it was better they were inside 
for the extra 3 minutes they were walking, because they 
were breathing fresh air, because when they got outside 
it was like snowing. 

But the initial 5 pounds of stuff that came 
down, 5 inches or -- that was only -- they had a few 
extra minutes of breathing in the air that was inside. 
Then I was walking around here, Vesey and West. I had 
a stair chair, an oxygen tank and one mask. I had a 
little respirator I had put on. I was wearing my 
helmet. I was just kind of walking around, looking for 
patients to direct them up Vesey towards the river. 

I don't know what happened here, but I just 
knew -- like I saw my friend Pedro, who is a cop at the 



L. MCCARTHY 

9th precinct, covered in dust. Covered-- Velasquez, 
Officer Pedro Velasquez. He had a partner in there 
too, somewhere that he was, somewhere near him, but it 
wasn't -- he just asked me where do I go. I said 
wherever you go, don't go towards those buildings. 
Stay away. 

He said okay, so I think he wandered up that 
way, but you know, there was so many people running and 
I didn't keep in touch, so I was up here. I had a 
bunch of firefighters on the floor. I was cleaning 
their eyes with -- I had wheeled someone up to, you 
know -- someone else took over the 225 pounds of 
patient, going up this hill in this thick stuff. 

Q. Just speak a little louder. 

A. Okay. Then I was helping some firefighters 
rinse their eyes on the corner when I heard the next 
rumble. I said oh, it's happening again. I don't know 
what is happening. Run, run, run. So we all ran right 
in front of -- there is a building here. 

Q. North End Street that you are pointing to? 

A. Yes, there was a building but it's not 
there. That's what we ran into, this building, but we 
stood outside for a while, because there was a lady 
outside whose pacemaker kept kicking out, kicking off. 



10 
L. MCCARTHY 



She said I have to go that way. She is pointing 
towards north, towards the school, the high school, and 
there is a big cloud of something coming around. I 
said Miss, I don't think so. You won't be able to 
breathe. In one minute that cloud is going to hit us, 
wrap us up where we are now. We should go right 
inside, don't you think. She said okay. 

So we went right in the lobby here and other 
people came in and then they started -- then it was 
enveloped with this next cloud of smoke, debris and 
dust. But they started bringing in patients. That 
lobby, for us, became a triage area away from the front 
site. I don't remember names, but we had some triage 
tags, so I was -- eventually when we got all these 
people on the oxygen trees. They brought the 10 and 12 
oxygen hook ups to it. Some people in them, some 
people rinsing eyes. We had a fire Chief in there with 
a shoulder and a leg injury. We had a journalist, who 
had -- I don't know, I can't remember whether -- maybe 
it was an ankle injury and a civilian that was helping 
her. A lot of firefighters and police officers. Maybe 
about 22 patients in there at one point. 

Then they said the building is going to blow, 
the gas line. So everyone has to move on. They said 



11 

L. MCCARTHY 



anyone that can walk has to walk, so these people 
(inaudible) got up, they were walking, we had to wheel 
the fire Chief. They were going this way, and we had 
one man that kept fainting. He said he had escaped 
being killed and the Firefighter next to him had died, 
was killed. He wasn't hit or anything, but he was, I 
guess it was psychogenic shock, because he kept -- even 
lying down he was fainting. He was syncopizing. 

I ended up with just him on a stretcher, with 
him on an oxygen tank, nobody else, everyone was going 
forward and piling equipment on stretchers and giving 
oxygen trees to try and get more and they wheeled the 
fire Chief away and I had this one young man that just 
kept going in and out. I said I have to get him to the 
hospital. He won't last going up. I don't know what's 
going to happen to him. 

So I called out to a paramedic from Cabrini. 
His name is Slice. I don't know what his real name 
is. I said Slice can you help, he said what's going 
on. I said I'm pushing this guy through this thick 
stuff. I don't have any help. We need to get him to a 
hospital. Can you help me. He said sure, I will 
drive, you tech, we will get him to a hospital. So we 
jumped in -- he had lost his partner in the commotion. 



12 
L. MCCARTHY 



He didn't know where his partner -- his partner is 
Andy, big guy. Andy was lost, but this man kept 
fainting. I said please, I don't know what's going on 
with him. 

So we took him and another patient we picked 
up on the way to Long Island College Hospital. I saw 
thousands of people walking across. I was busy teching 
when we were in the -- but coming back, I saw thousands 
with arm injuries and nothing like life threatening 
right there, but totally bewildered coming over the 
bridge. That was cool the way you just went across the 
bridge. I would have gone to St. Vinny's, the places I 
know, but it was right there. He said well, yes, that 
was the closest at that point. 

We went back to the scene and we picked up 
two more, two Port Authority police officers that had 
been in the mall area directing people. It had been an 
hour, hour and a half since they -- but it took them an 
hour to get out. One had an arterial bleed on his 
arm. That was, you know, controlled or whatever. The 
other one was, I can't remember his injuries, but we 
took them to St. Vincent's. 

Q. Just a question for you. You started with 
the rumbling. Did you actually see the north tower 



13 
L. MCCARTHY 



come down? 

A. All I saw was -- so much debris was just 
obscuring my view of the north tower. No. The north 
tower, I was up here, the second one, right? 

Q. Right. 

A. I was up at Vesey and I didn't even look up. 
I know it was the scariest thing. It was like an 
earthquake and I didn't take the time to look up to see 
it, because I saw all this debris again. I just said 
run, run. People were saying people are jumping. Well 
this little building on the end was obscuring my view 
at one point from the people jumping. 

Once I saw a little something hanging over 
the side and it looked like a foot, but that's not 
something I wanted to see. But this building here 
actually obscured my vision from people jumping, 
because of the angle I was. It's an 8 story building. 
It's not a small building, so it was between the fire 
and that, I hadn't seen (inaudible). 

Q. I'm sure it was a very long day for you that 
day. 

A. Right. That's all I did. Around 11 o'clock 
is probably when we ended up taking the patients up to 
-- I stayed there all day and all evening too. That's 



14 
L. MCCARTHY 



when we took the patients to St. Vincent's, the two 
Port Authority police officers. I guess that would be 
around 11, I'm not sure, approximately. He did find 
his partner, up at 23rd Street, Chelsea Piers. 

Q. Did you ever notify anybody that you were 
actually operating on the scene that day finally at 
some point? 

A. Yes, I did talk with Sammy, who works with 
Chief Diggs. This was in the afternoon though when I 
was trying to get back to do a mutual tour at 4 
o'clock. Sammy made said no, you have been here all 
day, stay here and this will become a straight tour, so 
the next two tours became straight time for me, so I 
didn't do a tour 3 and a tour 1 the next night. I just 
did an all day tour 2 and tour 3 and went home or did 
what I did. 

MR. CUNDARI: All right. Thank you for 

keeping this time for this interview. This 

concludes the interview. It is 1220. Thank you 

very much. 



</XMP></BODYx/HTML> 



File No. 9110214 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
ROGER MOORE 
Interview Date: November 29, 2001 



Transcribed by Maureen McCormick 



MR. MURAD: Today is November 29, 2001. The 
time now is 1410 hours, and my name is Murray 
Murad of the New York City Fire Department. I am 
conducting an interview with -- 

LIEUTENANT MOORE: Lieutenant ROGER MOORE of 
EMS Division 5. 

MR. MURAD: This is regarding the events on 
September 11, 2001, and this interview is being 
conducted in the home of Lieutenant ROGER MOORE at 
146 Sharet Road on Staten Island. 
BY MR. MURAD: 

Q. Lieutenant Moore, can you give us your events 
perspective on that day? 

A. At that point, at approximately just five 
minutes before the job originally came in, we were all 
at the academy for a refresher, and I was with Chief 
Randy Hirth and Grace Cacciola, lieutenant. We had 
heard that there was something going on. It came over 
our pagers that it was a plane. 

We went into the administration wing of the 
academy. Someone had a television on, and we saw it, 
and we said we should probably go. Chief Hirth was, 
like, why don't you come with me, because they are 
probably going to bring everybody from the academy 



ROGER MOORE 

anyway, and this way they can use you, and we proceeded 
to get into his car and responded to the scene. 

We went down the LIE through the Midtown 
Tunnel and up onto the west -- no, east side drive. 
FDR Drive, excuse me. At that point at 42nd Street the 
police had closed off, so we had to -- a free ride all 
the way down and could get a bird's eye view. 

The second plane had just hit. We continued 
on, pulled up by -- came up West Street and stopped at 
the tunnel exit to the Lincoln -- to the Brooklyn 
Battery Tunnel. We figured that would be the best 
place to park, because there were so many trucks we 
didn't want to get blocked in, and a lot of emergency 
apparatus still responding, so we parked there. 

I got a helmet from his trunk and proceeded 
to walk to the command post, which was located at West 
and Vesey Street. While we were walking, we noticed 
three blocks away from the Trade Center that there were 
body parts scattered all over the roadway, and that 
there were police officers trying to safeguard the body 
pieces . 

Q. Were they civilians or you think they were 
from the aircraft? 
A. Unknown. 



ROGER MOORE 

Q. You don't know? 

A. I mean, you really had to look to see 
these -- these looked like hunks of meat. People were 
torn apart, so we decided to go across the street on 
the water side and continued up to the command post. 

Q. Which was located where? 

A. At West and Vesey, the EMS command post. I 
reported -- the chief, myself, and Grace reported to 
Chief Gombo, who was in charge of the command post. 
They had given Chief Gombo -- Chief Gombo had given 
Chief Hirth an assignment, and they took off. 

I was waiting for my assignment. Chief Nigro 
came over and was talking, along with First 
Commissioner Feehan, and a few minutes went by. They 
said, "We are going to give you an assignment." I 
said, "Okay, I'm here ready to go." The next thing I 
know, I heard Chief Nigro yell, "Look out, look up." 

We all looked up, and the building was on its 
way down, so we immediately dropped what we were doing 
and proceeded to run towards the water. That was -- 
there was a loading dock from the American Express 
building about 40 feet away. 

As we were running, I managed to trip just 
outside of the loading dock and came down on the ground 



ROGER MOORE 

and hit the curb, taking out my knees and my left 
elbow. I was now trying to crawl with one arm. I 
managed to roll a little bit, and a fireman grabbed and 
pulled me in. At the same time Lieutenant -- Captain 
Sickles landed on top of me, but at this time -- and 
the building was now hitting the ground outside 
--directly outside. 

Essentially, I thought I wasn't in far 
enough, but at that point, you know, it was -- you 
couldn't see any more. It was a black, black night, 
and dust, and dirt and everybody was choking. 

After approximately ten minutes went by, you 
could start to see flashlights and people starting to 
talk and moving around. They came over to me, and 
asked, you know, let me help you up, and I couldn't get 
up. Both legs and the arm were shot. I figured they 
were broken. They said, "Don't go anywhere." 

Commissioner Frank Gribbon came over and 
said, you know, he was dressed out in his uniform, in 
his turnout gear, and he said, "I'm going to get a 
crew, I'll be right back." Two firemen that were there 
said, you know, "We're not going to leave you," and 
they saw a stretcher over here, let's grab the 
stretcher. They put me on the stretcher, and said, you 



ROGER MOORE 

know, the best thing to do is probably go out through 
the loading dock into the building and out the back of 
the building where it's safe. 

They said okay. So they wheeled me down to 
the loading dock, put me up on the loading dock into 
the building. Just as we are getting ready to get onto 
the elevator, we heard a high pitched whine and wind 
and heard thundering crashes. It turned out to be -- 
we thought -- we originally thought it was the building 
that we were in was coming down, but it turned out to 
be the other tower. 

Q. That was the north tower? 
A. Right. 

At that point, the power went out in the 
building. They switched to their flashlights. After a 
couple of minutes, the emergency generators, I guess, 
kicked in or the emergency batteries. Some lights came 
back on, and they are, like, we need to get out of 
here, and I said, "Well, I can't walk." They said, 
"Well, we're not leaving you either," so they got on 
their radio and managed to get a couple of people that 
were upstairs. They came down the fire escape inside 
the stair building. I think it was Stairway F or G. 
The five of them carried myself and the hundred pound 



ROGER MOORE 

ambulance stretcher up four flights of stairs. 

They had said, you know, "My name is Steve 
and my name is --" the other guy's name is Gary, and, 
you know, "We are going the help you." Listening to 
them talk on the radio, I was able to come to the 
conclusion that they were from Truck 6. They were 
saying Truck 6 to whoever, and they were, you know -- 
those people came down. 

They then proceeded to get me up the stairs. 
After about ten, fifteen minutes they got me up to the 
top, and they wheeled me out. There was a battalion 
chief there. I couldn't see his name. 

They took me out the side door of the 
American Express Building and wheeled me down to the 
marina. The same time, there was a police launch 
pulling up, so they wheeled me down to the marina the 
rest of the way and put me on the police launch. 

At that point, I was still basically in shock 
and sort of like in a daze, and they then took me -- 
took a few other people. They said, "We are out of 
here." They backed away, and they went to Ellis 
Island. I had asked them if they could take me to 
Staten Island, but they said, "No, no, no, we can't do 
that. " 



ROGER MOORE 



We got to Ellis Island. The New Jersey EMS 
was in the process of setting up their command post and 
their resources. They helped me. They carried the 
stretcher off of the boat onto the ground. They 
switched me on to a Jersey stretcher, put the other 
stretcher back in to go back and get more patients. At 
that point, I was triaged by the Jersey EMS, and they 
triaged me as a yellow and -- excuse me, as a red, 
because I was still having some difficulty breathing 
with all the stuff that I had inhaled. 

They then put me into an ambulance and took 
me to Jersey City Medical Center. There they traumaed 
me and, you know, did the whole trauma workup, where I 
was then admitted, and so on and so forth. 

Q. So they did the surgery in Jersey, right? 

A. No, they did -- 

Q. Just stabilize you? 

A. They stabilized me. 



ROGER MOORE 



("But we are 
going to have to admit you anyway for the legs, because 
you can't move. The x-rays don't show any broken 
bones, however, it looks like you've torn the muscle. 
We are going to have to get MRIs to do it." 

They then wheeled me up onto another floor 
that they had just opened to -- for this disaster, and 
I was medicated the rest of the afternoon. 

That night, PD showed up. New York City PD 
was going around taking names and information from all 
the patients that were there. At that point, I asked 
one of the officers if he could try and contact my 
wife, and they were, like, well, the phones are out, so 
he says, "Let me try something." 

He switched on his radio and was able to hit 
the Staten Island dispatcher, and they sent the car to 
my address . 

Q. That was very nice. 

A. However, she -- when she -- my wife saw the 
incident, she was off that day. She went in to work to 
help in the ER. So that night she comes home at about 



10 
ROGER MOORE 



11:30, not knowing where I am and knows that I always 
call and was quite concerned. She comes in, and 
neighbors come in behind her and tell her, well, you 
know, the police were here. 

So at that point she finally got ahold of 
Division 5, and she found out where I was. My 
neighbors drove her and some other friends to the 
hospital at one o'clock in the morning, and then I saw 
my wife. 

The next day, they treated me and ruled out 
the hip fracture that they thought I had, which I 
didn't. I said I really want to get to Staten Island 
because I want to be able to contact my wife. I 
couldn't call anybody because of the phones being 
restricted, because of the hospital, you know, policy. 
They only had two or one, so it was next to impossible 
for me to try and contact. 

I had made it known, and the next thing I 
knew I was transferred that night, Wednesday night, 
around eleven o'clock. Jersey EMS took me to Staten 
Island Hospital, where I was admitted. At that point 
they took over my care, and my regular physician, Dr. 
Carl Andersen, along with orthopedics from Staten 
Island Associates, took over my case. They requested 



11 

ROGER MOORE 



MRIs of both my legs, and they continued treating my 
eyes, and my breathing, and my arm and what not. Then 
I had the surgery on both legs . They told me that the 
MRIs showed that my left leg was completely detached, 
the muscles completely detached, along with the 
ligaments and the tendons, and retracted. The right 
leg had a partial tear in the muscle and tendons. The 
tendons were torn. 

So they reattached everything. They put my 
left leg into a cast that I had to have on for six 
weeks. They -- the right leg with minimal work, they 
put a removable splint on. 

After a couple of days in the hospital, they 
then moved me in the hospital to inpatient rehab where 
I spent the next two and a half weeks. Then from there 
I was released on October 12. I came home, and I am 
now going to outpatient rehab at Staten Island 
University Hospital. 

MR. MURAD: There is nothing really I need to 

ask of you, so at this time, this will conclude 

the interview. 

I'd like to thank you, Lieutenant Roger 

Moore . 

The time now is 1425 hours, and this 

concludes the interview. Thank you. 



File No. 9110273 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMT FRANK PUMA 
Interview Date: December 12, 2001 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



F. PUMA 2 

MR. MURAD: Today's date is December 
12th, 2001. The time is 0730 hours. I am 
Murray Murad of the New York City Fire 
Department. I am conducting an interview 
with -- 

EMT PUMA: EMT Frank Puma of Division 1 
EMS. 

MR. MURAD: The interview is being done 
at Battalion 8, the Kips Bay station, 
Station 13. This is regarding the events of 
September 11th, 2001. 

Q. Can you please describe the events with 
respect to that day? 

A. Just from the collapse? 
Q. Yeah, from the time the call came in, 
from the beginning or whenever you were there, to 
the World Trade Center. 

A. Before the first plane even hit, me and 
my partner -- our unit designation is 1 Adam, and 
our street corner is Fulton and Church, it's our 
89. So we were about a block away, two blocks 
away on Barclay between Church and Broadway 
getting breakfast when we heard the first plane 
hit. 



F. PUMA 3 

After we heard the first plane hit and 
felt the ground shake, I ran down to the corner 
of Church and Park Place, looked up and I saw the 
plane shooting out of the top of the towers. 
That's when I grabbed for my radio and yelled 
over the air, "1 Adam. A bomb just went off in 
the Trade Center . " 

Me and my partner proceeded to grab the 
ambulance, turn it around. I jumped in the 
passenger seat, and we drove right up to Vesey 
and Church. When we got there, all the people 
started running out to us, and we were bombarded 
with patients. 

Through that whole time before the 
second plane hit, we were treating anywhere 
between 7 and 15 different patients. When the 
second plane hit, me and my partner were in the 
back of our ambulance. We felt all the debris 
come down, bouncing off of me, myself, my 
partner, shooting inside the back of our 
ambulance and rocking our ambulance back and 
forth. We shut the doors, jumped on top of all 
of our patients. 

Once all that cleared up, once the 



F. PUMA 4 

ambulance stopped rocking, my partner looks at me 
and says, "We've got to get out of here." He 
then proceeded to get into the driver's seat, and 
we started making our way to NYU Downtown 
Hospital, Beekman, to drop off our first set of 
patients when we got flagged down for another 
lady who got hit by the landing gear of the first 
plane. 

We then proceeded to put her on a long 
board as best as we could, because we couldn't 
roll her because she had no back anymore. We put 
her on the long board and put her in the back of 
the ambulance, dropped off our first set of 
patients at Beekman Hospital. 

Then after that we took about a minute 
to take some sterile water and clean off the back 
of the ambulance, all the blood and everything. 
From there we proceeded to go back into ground 
zero. We started our way back in, and we stopped 
again on Barclay and Church Street, where we 
helped another unit long board two more patients. 

We then proceeded to go back to Vesey 
and Church where we originally were, but we were 
stopped by the PD. We noticed other ambulances 



F. PUMA 5 

going into Battery Park City, so we followed 
them. That's where we had our triage center set 
up, one of our many triage centers that day. 

We were placed at the back of the line. 
We left our ambulance running. We went up to the 
LSI) truck to go get more supplies, because we 
diminished the first set of supplies. We started 
walking back up towards West Street between 
Liberty and Vesey when we heard them start 
screaming over the radio that the first tower, 
the south tower, was ready to fall. 

We started running because we looked up 
and we saw the part of the tower coming down. Me 
and my partner started running, and I ran west 
down Vesey Street and almost jumped right into 
the Hudson River. 

Once all the smoke and debris cleared 
up from the first tower collapse, I then got up 
to look around for anybody that I knew. I ran 
into a couple people that I work with: EMT Allen 
Cruz, who was working the LSI) truck that day, EMT 
Joe Torres, EMT Mike D'Angelo and a couple other 
faces that I don't remember their names. 

We then proceeded to go in to move all 



F. PUMA 6 

the ambulances that were parked on Vesey and West 
Street and move them up further on North End 
Avenue. Then we heard them screaming over the 
air that the second tower was ready to fall. 

I then proceeded to run back to my 
ambulance, started up the ignition and grabbed 
EMT Mike D'Angelo with me, and we started driving 
off. I made it as far as Chambers and West 
before the cloud of smoke caught up to me. When 
the cloud of smoke caught up to me, me and him 
were stuck, trapped inside of our ambulance for 
approximately it felt like about ten minutes. It 
could have been anywhere between five and ten 
minutes. 

I shut the motor off. That way the 
motor wouldn't take in any of the fumes. We had 
all the doors shut and all the windows closed. 
We were stuck in the ambulance in pitch-black for 
about ten minutes with all the smoke finding its 
way in there. 

Once that cleared up, we got out of the 
ambulance and walked back to Vesey and North End 
Avenue to see if there was anybody else that we 
knew around there. We ran into EMT Joe Torres 



F. PUMA 7 

again and EMT Allen Cruz. Then after that we 
heard that we were starting to set our staging 
area up further near the Chelsea Piers. 

We proceeded to run back to our 
ambulance, and we took off. We started making 
our way up north via West Street where we stopped 
off at North Moore and West Street where we ran 
into a lot of the other EMTs and paramedics who 
were operating at the scene. I finally ran into 
my partner, Orlando Martinez, after an hour and a 
half of being separated from him. 

Then we heard them screaming over the 
air again that there was a gas leak, everyone 
keep pushing forward. We then proceeded to get 
back in our ambulance. My partner, Orlando 
Martinez, was driving the ambulance at that time. 
I jumped in the passenger seat. EMT Mike 
D'Angelo jumped on my lap, and about ten other 
EMTs and paramedics jumped in the back of our 
ambulance and just started screaming to drive. 

We proceeded to go up to the Chelsea 
Piers, where they had our staging area set up 
there. Once we got up there, we just started 
looking for anybody who was from our station. 



F. PUMA 8 

Then at that point we started running into more 
people from our station, EMT John Moritz, EMT 
Kevin McKeon. I don't remember all the names 
offhand. Then we just stayed there until we were 
relieved by CISD at approximately 8:30 at night. 

Q. Were you operating on any type of radio 
frequency or how was the radio communications at 
the time? 

A. That morning I believe that both 
Manhattan south and Manhattan central were 
operating on the Manhattan central frequency, and 
we were told to just stay on that one frequency 
throughout the whole operation, intermittently 
switching between Manhattan south and citywide. 

Q. You did find your partner. Your 
partner was Orlando Martinez; right? 

A. Yeah. Me and him were separated for 
approximately an hour and a half after the first 
tower collapsed, because he ran north and I ran 
west . 

Q. Is there anything else you would like 
to add to this interview? 

A. Unless you want to know the details 
about the stuff that I saw. 



F. PUMA 9 

Q. Well, if you would like to go into it, 
you can. 

A. I remember when we pulled up first, 
because we were the first emergency unit on the 
scene there, I remember counting at least six 
bodies who jumped out from the 50th floor. I 
know one of the bystanders, one of the civilians, 
as he was running out of the towers ran up to us 
and told us, "You've got to help this guy." I 
turned to him and said "All right. What 
happened? Where is he?" He said, "He just 
jumped." I said, "From where?" He said, "I 
don't know. It looked like the 50th, 60th 
floor." I said, "Brother, I'm sorry to say he's 
dead. Just keep running." 

I remember after the first tower 
collapsed hearing over the EMS frequency all the 
EMS members screaming, "Mayday, mayday. Somebody 
please help us. We don't want to die in here." 
I listened to that for about two, three minutes. 
You had to lower the volume because you couldn't 
stand listening to that anymore. 

I remember the F-16s and the F-18s 
flying overhead before the first tower collapsed 



F. PUMA 10 

that we all jumped on the floor because we didn't 
know what it was. We looked up and saw it was 
our guys, and we were like, okay, we can stand up 
now and take control of this. 

I remember trying to run around trying 
to find like a respirator or something to put on 
our faces after the first tower came down, 
because we had no equipment with us. I remember 
losing all of my equipment down at the Trade 
Center before we left to drop off our first set 
of patients, because I had all my stuff on the 
outside. 

I just remember the sheer look of 
terror that came over my partner's face, which 
really got me nervous. When I saw that, I knew I 
was in trouble. 

I remember seeing some of the engine 
companies go in. I work downtown Manhattan, so I 
was friendly with a lot of the firefighters who 
were around there. I remember seeing a lot of 
them run in and not seeing them ever again. 

I knew all the Port Authority cops who 
worked in the building, because, like I said, 
that was my street. That was my 89 was the Trade 



F. PUMA 11 

Center. So we knew all the Port Authority cops 
in there by first names. We knew their first 
names, their shield numbers. When we walked in, 
they knew our shield numbers. We just like, 
"Hey, how you doing? How's your wife and your 
kids?" I remember reading about them in the 
newspaper that they still haven't found their 
bodies yet or seen that they were confirmed dead. 

I remember my parents' voice when I was 
on the phone with them. Right before the first 
tower collapsed, I was on the phone with my 
mother, telling her that two planes hit the Trade 
Center, that I was all right and okay, that I was 
still standing near the buildings but I was all 
right. Then we got disconnected, and that's when 
the first tower came down. 

I didn't get a chance to call my family 
until about two and a half hours after that. I 
remember the sounds of joy in my mother's voice 
when she heard me, that I was still alive. 

Q. That was important, communications to 
the family. 

All right. I'd like to thank you for 
this interview. 



F. PUMA 12 

MR. MURAD: The time now is 740 hours, 
and this concludes the interview. Thank you 
very much. 

EMT PUMA: Thank you. 



File No. 9110274 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMT CHARLES GSCHLECHT 
Interview Date: December 12, 2001 



Transcribed by Elisabeth F. Nason 



C. GSCHLECHT 

MR. MURAD: Today's date is December 12, 

2001. The time is 620 hours. My name is Murray 

Murad of the Fire Department of the City of New 

York. 

Q. I'm conducting an interview with the 
following . 

A. Charles Gschlecht, shield number 5445 of 
Battalion 8 . 

Q. Of the New York City Fire Department. This 
interview is being conducted at Battalion 8 located at 
Kip Bay station. This is regarding the events of 
September 11, 2001. 

Charles, can you please give us your 
perspective on what happened that day? 

A. All right. Well, the day started out as 
usual, you know, sign for the equipment, putting it on 
the truck, logging on, and going on to our CSL. 
Traveling up First Avenue to 34 Street, when we got to 
about 34 Street and Park Avenue, I forget what unit it 
was, but they said something just hit the World Trade 
Center. A few minutes after that you hear other people 
saying the same thing. 

Somebody said they thought it was a plane and 
that there was an explosion. So I asked my partner if 



C. GSCHLECHT 

he wanted to take the job, because we weren't assigned 
a job and he said yes, okay. We asked for the 
assignment. The dispatcher gave it to us and we 
started responding down 34 Street to West Street 
heading south. 

About when we got to Chambers Street, by the 
college, we saw the second plane hit the World Trade 
Center. I told my partner slow down and wait to see if 
the building was going to collapse right away, because 
you could see it swaying. After a couple of minutes of 
waiting, we didn't see it collapse, so we started 
heading in further. 

When we got to Vesey and West Street, the 
Lieutenant told us to set up second staging at 3 World 
Financial Center. I guess they were getting all the 
walking wounded that were coming over the pedestrian 
bridge. There were busses lined up there. Then we 
were triaging people, minor burns I guess. Then 
started loading them up on city busses. I remember 
running out of equipment, so I had to go to the LSU 
van, which was on the corner. 

I saw people jumping out of the World Trade 
Center. I saw a few people, I guess maybe three or 
four. After that I couldn't watch any more so I went 



C. GSCHLECHT 

back, took the equipment and I guess by the time I got 
back, I don't remember how long it took for, you know, 
the building to collapse or whatever, but most of the 
people were already in the busses and they were already 
going up like I guess towards the -- what is that place 
on 23 Street, Chelsea Piers. 

So then I heard -- I guess -- I'm not too 
sure. I know I heard a rumble and I figured it was the 
building coming down. I told my partner run and I 
started running and there was one person left there. I 
can't remember her name, but she was in the chair. She 
was strapped in the chair, so I ran back and I got her 
and just started running. Also the people started 
running up West Street. I guess they were overcome by 
like dust and debris and I started running up West 
towards the Hudson River. Then I started running 
north . 

I got back on West Street around Murray and 
there was another Lieutenant there, I can't remember 
his name, but he said that it was all over, that we are 
going to go two blocks in. I told him, I said, listen, 
if the first building collapsed, you don't think the 
second building is going to collapse. 

Then maybe about 10 minutes of deciding 



C. GSCHLECHT 

whether or not he was going to go two blocks in, the 
other building collapsed, I guess 10, 20 minutes. I 
don't know. Then I just started running up South 
Street, I couldn't find my partner for about 3 and a 
half hours, because initially when I told him to run, 
he started running with me and then I turn around and 
he is gone. I had no idea where he was. Like I said 3 
and a half hours later I found him. He told me, I 
think he was with the Captain and a Chief. 

Q. Do you know the Captain's name or the Chief's 
name? 

A. Yes, Captain Stone. He had to go to the 
hospital. He was injured. I don't know what part of 
the body was injured. 

Q. And the Chief's name? 

A. Hirth. Chief Hirth. I guess that's about 
it. 

Q. At any time, were you asked to switch to any 
frequency on the response into the World Trade Center? 

A. Yes, we were all on Citywide, but I had lost 
my radio when I was running. I left all my equipment 
in the truck. I saw the radio fall, 

I. 



running . 



C. GSCHLECHT 

Q. Anything else that you think you would like 
to add? 

A. I guess that's about it. 

MR. MURAD: Okay, time now is 0630. I would 
like to thank you, Charles, for this interview. 
This will conclude the interview. Thank you very 
much . 



File No. 9110275 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
PARAMEDIC ALBERT SINGER 
Interview Date: December 12, 2001 



Transcribed by Elisabeth F. Nason 



A. SINGER 

MR. MURAD: Today is December 12, 2001. The 

time is 0600 hours. My name is Murray Murad of 

the New York City Fire Department. 

Q. I'm conducting an interview with? 

A. Albert Singer. 

Q. Your rank and your command please? 

A. Paramedic, Battalion 8, Manhattan. 

Q. The interview is being conducted at Battalion 
8, the Kip Bay station. This is regarding the events 
of September 11, 2001. Al, can you please give us your 
perspective on that day, on September 11? 

A. Okay. Just prior to the collapse, my partner 
and I, Arty Gonzalez, and I were doing an RMA in the 
Long Island Railroad when the first plane hit. We were 
just completing the RMA and when the second plane hit, 
we knew that we had to respond. 

So we finished the RMA, we went to our 
ambulance. We had on the computer screen on the 
ambulance, the job was already there to respond to the 
World Trade Center. We drove down the West Side 
Highway. When we arrived at the vicinity of the World 
Trade Center, we were staged on the street on the West 
Side Highway, approximately where the AMEX, number 3 
World -- the AMEX building, 3 World Financial Center 



A. SINGER 

was . 

We were initially on the street. We observed 
the building, presumably the first World Trade Center, 
on fire and people were jumping off the roofs. About 
10 minutes later, we were told to set up a staging 
inside what I believe to be the American Express 
lobby. My partner and I, Arty Gonzalez, set up a 
staging area. 

10 minutes later a co-worker of ours, Corey 
Romanowski from BHS, showed up. We asked him to remain 
with us since he was unassigned. About 10 minutes 
later, two EMTs came running into the building saying 
that the World Trade Center was collapsing, that we 
should run. 

We proceeded out the American Express 
building and we proceeded to the building directly 
behind, which was 4 Financial Center, which is the 
Merrill Lynch building. We remained in that for about 
5 minutes before we were told to evacuate because there 
was a chance that the gas lines had been ruptured and 
the building was in danger of exploding. 

Following that, we went on to Vesey Street, 
where the commanding officer, whose name I don't 
recall, suggested we head towards the waterfront, which 



A. SINGER 

might have been the safest place. When we responded 
there, we remained there for about 5 minutes until we 
were redeployed up to one of the buildings on North End 
Avenue where staging had been set up. The MERV had 
been brought up. 

We treated and triaged some patients in the 
lobby of that building for about 15, 20 minutes. When 
it was deemed unsafe to remain there, every patient 
that was in the lobby was evacuated, whether by MERV or 
by ambulance, up to 23 Street. We had the first 
patient that we transported, so from that point on we 
transported our patient to St. Vincent's Hospital. 

Q. I just want to check with you. On that day 
what unit were you guys assigned to? 

A. 7 Young, Tour 2. 

Q. Were you operating on any radio frequency? 
Were you told to switch to any certain radio frequency 
and what was the radio transmissions like during that 
time? 

A. We were switched over. We were told to 
switch over to Citywide, but we never had to utilize 
the radio since the job was already on the KDT. 

Q. Is there anything else that you can think of 
that you would like to mention or -- 



A. SINGER 

A. I would like to mention that I think Corey 
Romanowski was a very heroic individual, he told us his 
experience outside the building. He had stepped 
outside for a few minutes and he came --he told us 
later on that he was nearly killed by the collapsing 
rubble of the building and he had dived under a fire 
truck, which had the springs collapsed by the weight of 
it while he was underneath it and he said that there 
were a couple of EMTs that were running for cover for 
the same fire truck and he said that they didn't make 
it, so he considered himself very lucky. He didn't 
know which way to run because of the fire and smoke. 
Eventually he did get out. That was the most 
remarkable thing I heard of the whole experience. 

MR. MURAD: Okay. Paramedic Albert Singer, I 

would like to thank you. The time is 0605 hours. 

This concludes the interview of the World Trade 

Center. Thank you very much. 



File No. 911303 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMT-D RALPH RAMOS 
Interview Date: December 12, 2001 



Transcribed by Elisabeth F. Nason 



R. RAMOS 

MS. BASTEDENBECK: December 12, 2001. The 
time now is 1556 hours. My name is Christine 
Bastedenbeck of the New York City Fire 
Department. I'm at EMS Battalion 4 conducting an 
interview with the following individual. 
Q. Please state your name, rank and your current 
unit . 

A. My name is Ralph Ramos, EMT-D, assigned to 01 
Charlie Tour 2, Battalion 4. 

Q. MR. RAMOS, I would ask you if you can recount 
the events of September 11, 2001. Were you working 
that day? 

A. Yes, I was working. I started at 0600 that 
morning. I was on my way back to my 89, which is on 
Duane and Church Street. We were returning back there 
from Battalion 4 and we were going up, I believe it's 
Pearl Street, and my partner Alex Loutsky and I, we 
witnessed the first plane hit the first tower. Saw it 
flying low and we thought, that plane's flying kind of 
low, and then it hit the building and we went over the 
radio and we told central that we had witnessed a plane 
hitting the building, and at first she didn't believe 
us, but then other units started saying they saw the 
same thing and then we proceeded straight over to the 



R. RAMOS 

Trade Center. 

We went down West Street and parked at West 
and Liberty. There was -- Lieutenant D'Avila was 
there. There were several other units already on the 
scene and there was a wave of people running out of the 
building, running towards us. Stopped like about maybe 
4 people, put them into our vehicle and I was treating 
them and in the process of doing that, the second plane 
hit right over top of us and all the debris started 
falling down on top of us. 

So we got in our vehicle. At that time 
everybody left the vehicle and ran down West Street. 
Everybody started running in different directions. We 
got into our vehicle and we followed Lieutenant D'Avila 
around to the east side of the building, which was 
Church Street and Dey Street and we parked on that 
corner there. He parked in front of us. 

On that side people were running out also, so 
we set up a triage and treatment in front of the hotel 
Millennium, which is right cross the street from them 
and we started treating patients as they were coming 
out. We stayed there for a while. Lieutenant D'Avila 
lost his voice, so he had asked me to stay next to him 
to sort of be his voice as far as giving the orders. 



R. RAMOS 

We were treating people and triaging and 
trying to send people out from that location. The 
vehicle, my vehicle, 219, stayed on the corner of 
Church and Dey, so see if they needed that for 
transport. It stayed there. In the process of 
treating and organizing the people getting out of 
there, all of a sudden we heard the rumble of the first 
tower, and it was just, you know, really just chaotic 
on the corner that we were at. We treated as many 
people as we could and got a lot of the people out of 
there via private ambulances and Fire Department 
ambulances that were on the scene. 

When the first tower started coming down, I 
got separated from Lieutenant D'Avila and my partner 
Alex. I started running towards -- we were on the 
corner close to Dey Street and Fulton Street, so I 
started running towards Fulton Street to try to get out 
of harms way, but by that time it was too late, because 
the building had came down. The dust cloud covered me 
and I couldn't see and I couldn't breathe. 
Q. Do you know where you were then? 
A. At that moment, at first the panic, I got 
disoriented from the panic, but I have worked this area 
for about a year and my unit has always been in that 



R. RAMOS 

area. I sort of closed my eyes and then made a map in 
my head of what I last saw and then using that as a 
guide in my head and feeling with my hands, I was able 
to find the building and just like patted alongside of 
the building until I got down Fulton Street. 

I made it as far as Broadway and I went into 
the bank that's on the corner, the left hand side of 
Fulton and Broadway. I think it's a Chase bank. I 
made it into the lobby of that building. Helped some 
people who were in there who had stuff in their eyes 
and stuff like that. Pouring water on it, get the dirt 
out of their eyes, like that. Tried to calm some 
people down. People who were in that building were 
trying to leave that building. You couldn't see 
outside. 

So I was trying to keep them -- blocking the 
doors, trying to keep them inside. It was me and 
another fireman, it was just us two that made it into 
that building. We kept everybody inside, then I ran 
into one of the EMS doctors, Fire Department doctors. 
I forgot his name. We ran into him and he said you 
know, just try to take care of as many people as you 
can in here, just flushing their eyes and stuff like 
that. 



R. RAMOS 

Did that and then it cleared up enough 
outside, I realized that I left -- my partner was 
missing and Lieutenant D'Avila was missing. I was 
getting ready to head out and I ran into Lieutenant 
D'Avila. He had made it to the bank as well. We went 
back down Fulton Street back to the front of the 
building to look for my partner. 

So Lieutenant Melarango, who was there also, 
and Amy, Lieutenant Monroe. We went down to try to 
find them and see how many people we could help. We 
went back down and it was like a ghost town down 
there. We didn't see anybody, people laying around and 
stuff, but as far as walking around, there really 
wasn't anybody. 

My vehicle exploded. I was heading over to 
my vehicle to get -- to use the radio, because I had 
lost my HIP radio. I went inside my vehicle to get on 
my vehicle radio, but by the time I went over there, 
the vehicle exploded. Then we just continued to look 
around see, you know, how many people we could find. 
It is a little bit of a blur. I don't recall how many 
people we might have run into. 

At that time, then, in the process of doing 
that, we heard another loud rumble and it was the 



R. RAMOS 

second tower coming down. We both started -- you know, 
we hugged, locked arms. Both started running, but we 
didn't make it too far. Again, we got covered with the 
cloud and everything got black again. We couldn't 
breathe and we were panicking. Again, I closed my eyes 
and mapped my way out of there and made it to a Subway 
sandwich shop that's on Fulton Street and banged on the 
glass. They didn't want to let us in. We saw people 
in the back. I was waiting for someone to open the 
door, we were banging on the glass. We couldn't 
breathe any more. Everything was fading fast. Finally 
one of the people came and opened the door and we went 
in. 

There was only about 12 people in the store. 
They were all panicking and stuff like that. When they 
saw us, they kind of calmed down. We wet towels and 
wrapped them around their heads and we got them out of 
the store down Fulton Street towards New York downtown 
hospital to get them out of there. 

Then after that, I ran into a couple of 
Beekman, the New York downtown medics. Two Beekman 
medics. I can't recall. I can't recall. I stuck with 
Lieutenant D'Avila. 

We got supplies and took it over to 49 Fulton 



R. RAMOS 

Street, where they had set up a little triage area 
also. We took supplies from the hospital and brought 
them over there. From there we went to West and 
Chambers to the high school. They had set up -- 

Q. Stuyvesant High School? 

A. Yes. We went over there. Ran into a lot of 
my friends. (inaudible), who was from this Battalion, 
but transferred out. I think I saw Thomas Monahan, 
Tommy Monahan, who was from this Battalion. I saw -- I 
don't know his first name. I know his last name is 
Hayden and his Father is a Chief of the fire 
suppression side. I saw him. I saw Allan Cruz from 
this Battalion. He does the LSU from this Battalion. 

Q. Did you ever reunite with your partner? 

A. No, actually. We had gotten separated, so 
the whole time he was thinking I was dead and I was 
thinking he was dead. Looking for him though, 
(inaudible), and the mass of all the people who were 
there, and all those people who responded. All those 
who were told to stay in the high school until they 
needed them. Looking through faces, trying to see him 
and I didn't see him for a long time. It wasn't until 
the next day that I saw him. 

Q. Did you ever get word that day that he was 



R. RAMOS 

okay? 

A. No, not that day. 

Q. (inaudible)? 

A. I looked through the whole entire high school 
to see if he made it or not. I stayed over there at 
the high school for a while, until, I think about 9 
o'clock at night and then I couldn't go any more, 
because it was just too overwhelming for me and I 
passed out and I woke up in New York downtown 
hospital. Got treated for exhaustion and smoke 
inhalation and stuff. 

Q. Do you know how you got there? 

A. I remember telling Lieutenant D'Avila that I 
wasn't feeling right and then they started walking me 
over towards the MERV and I just sort of woke up in the 
emergency room. 

Q. Beekman? 

A. Beekman, yes. They treated me there and then 
they released me. I went home, I walked back to the 
Battalion first to take my stuff and leave it in the 
locker, my uniform, and put my street clothes back on. 
I walked from New York downtown back here to the 
Battalion. 

Then I saw my friend, (inaudible), was here. 



10 



R. RAMOS 



I saw Orlando Martinez, Frank Puma. Who else? I think 
I saw Rick Abono, Rick Abono was here also, I believe. 
Q. Are these people that work at your Battalion? 



Yes. 



They were all working that day? 

Yes. They were all people from this 
Battalion. Some of them responded in from home. They 
came in. I saw Gregory Zeek, who came in. He was on 
AL. He had like -- was on vacation. He came back in. 
He was here. He was my third partner from my unit. It 
was me, Al Loutsky and Gregory Zeek, all on one Charlie 
and Zeek was on vacation. Me and Al were working 
together that day. 

I saw Zeek, who was off. He was here. I 
really can't recall, you know. They were glad to see 
me and I was glad to see them. But as far as specific 
faces and names, I really, I guess I'm trying to push 
it back into my head so much, instead, it's starting to 
become very vague for me. 

I left work and I went home. From there went 
home. I came back to work the next day at 11 in the 
morning. 

Q. Is there anything else you would like to add 
to the day, anything that strikes you or -- 



11 

R. RAMOS 



A. No. Just the terror of -- from almost having 
died twice. It was like, you know, I was never one to 
be afraid of dying and then it happened, almost 
happened once and I made it out of there and I was like 
glad I made it out. It was enough to put an impression 
on me and then to go through it again so quickly 
afterwards. So like the first time it put an 
impression on me and the second time is seared it into 
my head, you know. 

So that is about it that I can think of. I'm 
glad that I'm here, that I was able to make it out. 
MS. BASTEDENBECK: This concludes my 

interview with EMT Ramos. The time now is 1610 

hours. Thank you very much. 



File No. 9110304 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMT NICOLE FERRELL 
Interview Date: December 13, 2001 



Transcribed by Nancy Francis 



N. FERRELL 

LIEUTENANT McCOURT: The date is December 
13th, 2001. The time is 0720 hours. My name is Tom 
McCourt, New York City Fire Department. We're 
conducting an interview at Battalion 45, EMS Command, 
in regards to the World Trade Center attack. Being 
interviewed is -- 

EMT FERRELL: Nicole Ferrell. 

LIEUTENANT McCOURT: -- EMT Nicole Ferrell. 

Q. Could you please give me the details of your 
experiences on September 11th, 2001, at the World Trade 
Center? 

A. When the first plane had hit, we were still 
parked in our area and I was sitting on Queens 
Boulevard and Greenpoint. 

Q. What unit were you assigned to? 

A. 49 Boy. 

Q. 49 Boy. Okay. 

A. When we heard that the plane went into the 
first building, we went and drove closer to the water, 
which was near the 108th Precinct on 50th Avenue and 
5th Street, to get a better look. So we drove down and 
we saw that it was a fire and we heard units being 
dispatched to it, which we were not assigned at the 
time. 



N. FERRELL 

Q. Who were you working with? 

A. Jeff Warner. We ended up going to another 
job instead and made that a 98. Then after we left 
that job, we went back to our unit to watch what was 
going on. We saw that it was still burning and we just 
waited to see if we were going get assigned to it. 
After a while my partner picked up the radio and kind 
of got us assigned to the job by asking the dispatcher 
did he need more people over there and they sent us. 

On our way there, the first tower, which was 
the south tower, was the one that collapsed while we 
were en route. Then, when we got to -- what I believe 
is we drove down Broadway and we made a left. When I 
got to Liberty, right over here, is when the next tower 
collapsed, right after. After that we ran with all the 
people and we took the ambulance and we drove across 
Liberty again, went up I believe it was Church. 

Q. When you got down there originally on 
Liberty, did you see anybody? The building hadn't 
collapsed at that point, right? 

A. When I just pulled up to Liberty, we had just 
pulled up, just got out, and there was still debris 
flying around and no sooner than we got out is when the 
other tower came down. 



N. FERRELL 

Q. Okay. 

A. No sooner. So we were out of there because 
we had parked over here. So then we came down Liberty 
and we went up, I believe, Church and went to this side 
instead, which was, I think, Vesey and Church, and we 
were standing in front of building 5, across from the 
post office. Then, from there I told him let's go up 
West Street. So we went up to West and I believe 
Murray and left the ambulance and walked back down over 
here. After a while, just things started happening 
because we couldn't find anybody. 

Q. You didn't come in contact with anybody, any 
supervisors or anybody from your command or anybody? 

A. No. Not at all. Because by the time we got 
over here, everybody was like running in every 
direction. You couldn't barely see at all. It was 
like snow, the stuff was so heavy, and people were just 
running and screaming and stuff like that. Some cars 
were on fire and I remember some people were choking 
and stuff and running towards there but they didn't 
want to be treated and they kept going. 

Q. Did you treat any patients at all? 

A. Actually, we attempted to treat a firefighter 
and he didn't want to be treated. But what we did was 



N. FERRELL 

he said he wanted to be driven back to another area 
where I guess they were doing like staging or something 
like that. So I told him that we would drive him 
around to where the MERV is and maybe he can reconnect 
with some of the other Fire Department resources that 
were over here somewhere. 

Q. So you moved from Church and Vesey? 

A. Yes. We moved from Church and Vesey and we 
went up to -- let's see. If I'm not mistaken, I was 
going up West Street, because we actually just went, 
you know, we did an actual triangle just about and went 
up West Street and then cut across to meet everybody 
else somewhere over here, I believe. I think it was on 
West Street, that's where everybody was, and I was at 
the first MERV right over there. 

Q. So it was West and Murray? 

A. Yes. That's where we were. 

Prior to us going to West and Murray with the 
fireman, we were right over -- I believe it was either 
5 or 7. See, my memory is a little bad because I don't 
know. I'm having a little hard time with this. But we 
went (inaudible) -- no. You know what? It was 7. Now 
I remember. It was 7 because we went over here to West 
Street, like I said, and I stopped here at Barclay and 



N. FERRELL 

I saw the firefighter. There were people screaming out 
of one of these two buildings over here saying they 
couldn't get out, and my partner took one straggler 
fireman, the one that we had with us, and was trying to 
break the door because the door obviously had shifted 
or something. They couldn't get the door open. 

Q. That was 7 World Trade Center? 

A. I believe it was 7. Maybe it was 5. It was 
at the back end of it because I do remember the 
telephone company. So I think it was the back end of 
7, I think right over here at that point, and they 
couldn't get out. Then I had ran down the block and I 
flagged a ladder company and they brought the ladder, 
which they had like a vestibule that you couldn't like 
really reach the people because the ladder wouldn't 
reach. So they went and got other resources, they went 
inside the building, and I told my partner that it 
wasn't safe and that we need to go because everything 
around us was like falling apart. So we got back in 
the ambulance. Like I said, I had the firefighter with 
me who was still injured at the time. 

Q. Do you know who that was? Do you remember? 

A. I have no idea. 

Q. Do you remember any company or was he -- 



N. FERRELL 

A. No. My partner probably would remember more 
than I could because everything was a mess. People 
were grabbing other people's coats and helmets. So I 
honestly don't know where he was from. All I know is 
that he was having a problem with his eyes and stuff 
like that, like us. He was complaining he couldn't see 
and stuff like that. But he couldn't find the rest of 
his company. 

So that was it. Then we went to over here to 
the MERV, in that area over there, and we had our bus 
parked near the school. Yes, right over here. We 
parked the bus down here and we walked to where 
everybody else was. 

Q. That was on Murray and West? 

A. Yes, I believe it was Murray and West. 
Wherever the college is? We were across the street 
from there and the pedestrian walkway was in front of 
us. I remember looking directly at it . I had went 
into an area where they had a whole bunch of EMTs and 
paramedics that were supposed to be congregating inside 
the auditorium in which they piled us all in. They 
closed one door and left the other one open. It was 
conducted by Lieutenant Kathy Fuchs. She told us all 
to gather all our equipment, gather together and we're 



N. FERRELL 

going to go out in groups of four or five, which would 
be like two paramedics and two EMTs or whatever. 

About a few minutes after that, we all piled 
in there and stuff, the lights went out, we lost 
power. She closed the door and locked us all in there 
and she ran. So we started trampling each other. So 
everybody started running all over each other. People 
were getting hurt and stuff. Finally a police officer 
came and opened the door for us because he heard us all 
screaming in there for about 15 minutes. We were in 
complete darkness. 

We came out and she told us to sit along -- 
let's see. I believe it's like a water area over 
here. It's like River Terrace. She told us to move 
down, I believe, over here and pile over here instead. 
When I saw that her plan wasn't working, I abandoned 
ship and I went to go stay with my Captain and Chief 
Nigro across from the MERV. I was there for a good 
part of the evening, but I was -- let's see. The 
walkway came down. 1 and 2 had already fell. I 
believe it was either 7 -- but 7 was empty at the time, 
when it came down, that I remember. We had just missed 
the collapse of 7 because me and my partner moved 
away. Then we were in the MERV, and after the MERV, we 



N. FERRELL 

stayed there for a few hours or so and we rode around 
with a Cushman vehicle and we rode around the area 
where the site was, they let us ride around, all 
through here, all around here, where all the collapses 
were, and that's basically it. 

Then we went and made a makeshift hospital at 
an apartment building which was -- this part is going 
to be difficult because I'm not really sure exactly 
where this building was. 

Q. Okay. That's all right. 
A. But there was an apartment building. It 
looked like a hotel but it wasn't a hotel and they made 
it -- maybe it was the Millenium. It could have been 
the Millenium. I'm not really sure because there was 
just too much going on. But they made a makeshift 
hospital over there. They made us all set out like IVs 
and stuff like that and water and stuff, and we all 
stayed there for a good part of the night freezing to 
death and we started getting sick. So Lieutenant 
Hadala told us that we were all going to move from that 
location because it was freezing and it was dirty and 
we were filthy and we all were starting to get sick and 
we couldn't breathe. 

So we jumped into the MERV and moved closer 



10 

N. FERRELL 



up to Vesey Street, and I came back to look for my 
ambulance, which was supposed to be parked over here at 
West and somewhere, Murray or something, and they took 
my ambulance away. They took all my equipment away, 
they took all my personal stuff away, and my stuff was 
stolen. So I went to go with the gang to ask one of 
the supervisors where all my stuff was, and they said 
that they took our ambulance away because they thought 
that we had passed away. So they took our truck to 
Bureau of Training, and we stayed here for the rest of 
the night stranded until we found somebody to take us 
back. We were there for a total of, I believe, 28 
hours, 30 hours, and we came back to the station. 

Q. Okay. 

A. I didn't see any EMTs or paramedics or 
anything prior to them passing that were listed or 
(inaudible). As far as firefighters, I have no idea. 
I don't know who I saw or what. It was total chaos. 
So that was it. 

LIEUTENANT McCOURT: Okay. The time now is 
7:30. That concludes the interview. Thank you very 
much. 



File No. 9110305 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMT PATRICK RICHIUSA 
Interview Date: December 13, 2001 



Transcribed by Nancy Francis 



P. RICHIUSA 

LIEUTENANT McCOURT: The date is December 13, 
2001. The time is 0742 hours. My name is Tom McCourt 
from the New York City Fire Department. We are 
currently at EMS Command, Battalion 45. I'm currently 
interviewing -- 

EMT RICHIUSA: Patrick Richiusa. 

LIEUTENANT McCOURT: -- that's EMT Patrick 
Richiusa from Battalion 45. 

Q. EMT Richiusa, can you please tell me the 
events that transpired on September 11th, 2001, from 
your perspective, please? 

A. Okay. We left the station to go to our 89, 
and about 8:45 in the morning we noticed smoke coming 
from one of the towers, my partner and I, Laura 
Siebuhr. So we moved our position to a better location 
to see if maybe it was just a smokestack of a building 
in front that was just from the angle. It turns out 
that it was the tower that was on fire. So I asked the 
dispatcher over the air and -- 

Q. Where were you sitting at this point? 
A. Metropolitan and Forest Avenue. We moved to 
a better position and from there you could see the 
actual tower was on fire. So I asked the dispatcher 
over the air, and there was silence for about a minute, 



P. RICHIUSA 

and then the tones went off and they said a plane had 
crashed into the World Trade Center. So they started 
sending units from all over the place and I was 
assigned. I went over the 59th Street bridge. I 
forget exactly what route I took. I picked up two 
priests on the way once I had crossed the bridge into 
Manhattan because they asked if we were going and I 
figured they were going to be needed if a plane crashed 
into the Trade Center. 

So I came across Vesey to West. That's where 
staging was. I arrived there. I let the two priests 
out. I never saw them again. I found the first 
Lieutenant from EMS that I saw and he told me to go 
over to triage, which was right by 3 Financial. 

Q. Do you remember what Lieutenant that was? Do 
you have any idea? 

A. I have no idea. There was a group. It was a 
couple Lieutenants and I believe one Captain. I don't 
recall any one of their faces. 

Q. Okay. 

A. From there I went over to triage. There was 
about 15 people all laying around on the floor there, 
nurses, doctors, private ambulances, Fire Department 
ambulances, volunteer ambulances from Hatzolah. I 



P. RICHIUSA 

believe Forest Hills was also there. 

Q. What was the status of the towers then? 

A. They were still standing. This was about 
five minutes before the second plane hit and nobody had 
known it was a terrorist attack. So it was just -- we 
positioned the furthest point from Trade Center 2, 
which was the one first to get hit. So we went over 
and then the private ambulances started to try to take 
patients away, but I had no names and nothing else. So 
I went over to a Lieutenant and a Captain and I asked 
them and he put me in charge. So I went back and -- he 
told me nobody leaves until you say so, and I said 
okay, until you get names and all the other 
information . 

So I went back, stopped the ambulances. 
There was a city bus. Everybody was walking wounded. 
So I figured we could just take all 15 people in one 
shot in the city bus, and I was going back to ask the 
Lieutenant when the second plane hit. It was a loud 
thunder noise and you looked up and all the buildings 
on the opposite side of the tower's windows were 
shaking. So somebody started yelling run, so my 
partner and I both ran with all the people. The 
patients all got up and ran. We all ran towards the 



P. RICHIUSA 

Hudson, down West towards -- I mean Vesey. Sorry. I 
got that all backwards. Towards Vesey, towards the 
Hudson. When we arrived at, I guess, North End Avenue, 
that's when all that debris fell and it all -- 
basically, there was nowhere else to run, so you got 
enveloped by the cloud of smoke and debris. After that 
settled, there was a little chaos. Nobody was quite 
sure what happened. 

Q. That was the debris from the -- 

A. The plane actually crashing. 

Q. The plane? 

A. Yes. This was the actual when it blew out 
the 80 something floors. 

Q. Okay. 

A. That was the plane, the umbrella, you know, 
it looked like to me. 

Q. So the debris went that far, up to the river? 

A. It covered right up to the Hudson. I 
actually considered swimming the Hudson River because 
there was nowhere else left to run. 

Then the debris settled and there was a 
little chaos and nobody was really quite sure what 
happened because all the vehicles were parked down the 
block and a lot of equipment was down the block. Some 



P. RICHIUSA 

of the vehicles had been positioned on North End, I 
guess, from other areas, or maybe they were told 
afterwards, after the second plane hit, where to go. 
There was a large crowd of people. I don't know where 
they all came from. I guess it was just from all over 
that general area. People were sharing cell phones to 
see if they could call. There were no signals, nothing 
else like that. Afterwards I saw Chief Kowalczyk and 
Chief Gombo. 

Oh, prior to that I saw Bobby Abril, Carlos 
Lillo's partner, and my partner was a little nervous of 
the situation, she's new on the job, and I asked Bobby 
to stay with my partner, and he said, well, Carlos is 
down the block. I said, all right, I'll go get Carlos, 
you stay here, and I told Chief Kowalczyk and Chief 
Gombo that I was going to go down there and get Carlos 
and bring everybody else back up. He said, all right, 
tell them to bring all the equipment with them. 

So on the way down the block, by 3 Financial, 
there was still some guys standing there. So I told 
them bring all the equipment back up the block because 
we're going to put staging up there now at -- I don't 
even know what building that was there. 
Q. At Vesey and North End? 



P. RICHIUSA 

A. At Vesey and North End, yes. I think that 
was a hotel or something, in the lobby of there. So 
you had people coming up the block as I was going down 
the block, firemen, but you couldn't really recognize 
anybody because everybody was covered with the white 
powder, you know, you couldn't really see faces or 
anything else like that. There was nothing 
distinguishable about anybody. That's when I basically 
made the turn around West and I was coming across and 
it was by the pedestrian bridge when -- actually, no. 
The first tower fell and the second tower fell and we 
had no idea that the second tower fell. We were over 
here for a little while, then everybody got a little 
bit of their bearings back. 

Q. So that debris was actually from the tower 
falling? 

A. No, no. The first one was the plane 
crashing. My time frames are all messed up because 
things went and there was no time perception. I didn't 
realize how long I was there until I looked at my watch 
when it was time to go home. So I'm not sure exactly 
when 2 Trade Center fell because basically we were 
protected by the corner, the edge, because we were up 
over on North End and Vesey. So we wouldn't even have 



P. RICHIUSA 

known the second Trade Center had fallen because the 
debris would have been blocked by Trade Center 1 and 6 
Trade Center. So I never even knew the Trade Center 
had fallen . 

When I came around the block, and this was -- 
I don't remember what time it was. It was just minutes 
before 1 World Trade Center fell. I made the turn and 
two guys were walking towards me and I looked up and 
that's when I saw 1 Trade Center coming down. There 
was no way to outrun World Trade Center 1 from 
falling. So me and the two guys laid on the ground. I 
laid on top of them. 

Q. Who were they? 

A. I have no idea. 

Q. Were they civilians? 

A. Yes, civilians. One guy was a black guy in 
kind of a jump suit and one guy was a business guy 
dressed in something else. We got buried under all the 
debris from 1 World Trade Center and what was left of 6 
Trade Center when they both came down because they 
toppled into each other. I don't know how long we were 
under there. Everything went black and I felt stuff 
hitting me all over the place and they were screaming, 
I was screaming, everybody was yelling. Basically, it 



P. RICHIUSA 

was so loud that you couldn't hear anything else except 
what was right in front of your face, and everything 
went so black that it went from as if you shut all the 
lights off and closed your eyes, it was that dark. It 
was hard to breathe. That stuff, all that powder was 
getting in our faces, your eyes burning and everything 
else. 

I would say maybe a half an hour we were 
under that rubble before we dug ourselves out, before 
we thought it was okay. But when we opened our eyes, I 
thought, jeez, now we're in a cave. How the hell am I 
going to get out of here? But it was mostly debris and 
the powder. When we stood up after digging for about a 
half an hour, we basically just popped out of the 
powder, and five feet from where we were, an R&P, a cop 
car, was destroyed by an I-beam. So we got lucky with 
that. 

I walked them --we still couldn't really 
see. I had a flashlight and we just started walking to 
the side, and we walked into 3 Financial building and 
we traced that to the corner by touch because you still 
couldn't see anything, made the turn onto Vesey, and 
then all the way in the distance you could see a dim, 
blinking red light. I asked them if they could see the 



10 

P. RICHIUSA 



dim, blinking red light, and they said yes. So I said 
head that way because from behind us I heard a whole 
bunch of people screaming. 

So I went back and I met one lone fireman. I 
have no idea what his name was. I don't even know -- I 
couldn't even tell you what he looked like. But he 
came over to me, he gave me a Scott pack and a turnout 
coat to wear right then and there because we didn't 
know what else was going on, what else was going to 
hit. So I think that was out of -- I don't even know 
what truck that was. But I wound up giving that back 
later to one of the Battalion Chiefs. 

Then we went and started looking, and he was 
looking for some guy, I think his name was Paul or 
Frank he said help me find. So we started looking and 
the ground was caved in right by 6 World Trade Center 
and in the distance you could see ladder trucks turned 
into the building and it was -- then it was dead 
silent. There was no noise after 1 Trade Center fell. 
It was like something out of a movie. It was really 
loud and then it was -- maybe it was just my hearing 
from the blast. I wasn't hearing the minor things. In 
the parking lot across the street, cars were 
exploding . 



11 

P. RICHIUSA 



Then me and him went and looked and there 
were holes and stuff, and I said, well, where was he 
last? He goes I'm not exactly sure. There was nothing 
to landmark with at all at this point. So we just 
started looking through the rubble. We formed kind of 
like a Y or a V type of formation, always staying 
within visual of each other, to make sure neither one 
of us disappeared. I found a fireman -- I don't know. 
It was by a car, one of the Suburbans. I asked him are 
you okay? He said yeah, I'm fine, just like that. So 
he goes but two of my guys were on the other side of 
the truck. So I said okay. So I went around the other 
side of the truck and the other side of the truck was 
smashed by I-beams, and I looked under with a 
flashlight and I couldn't see anything. 

Then one guy we heard from all the way up. I 
figure it was in, I would say, what is that, the 
Customs Building? 6 Trade Center. All right. We 
heard somebody yelling. So me and the other guy, I was 
up first because then I called him over because I 
didn't know how many people were up there and I was 
going into a building. So he came up behind me and we 
found one fireman up there, and I said are you okay? 
He said my back. I said, listen, you're a big guy. Me 



12 
P. RICHIUSA 



and him aren't going to be able to carry you out of 
this, and he says, no, no, I can walk, I can walk. 

So we started walking out of what I thought 
at that time was the third floor of 6 Financial. It 
turns out six floors were standing of it because of the 
way debris angled up. So he was holding on to us. As 
we were coming down, we fell, I don't know, 10 to 15 
feet, and that's when I hurt my knee. I didn't really 
notice it then because it was just all utter chaos. 
There was like no time. I hadn't noticed that I had 
cut my arm and back either. 

Then we carried him down -- well, we climbed 
out and then we all went down and that's when other 
firemen started coming. So I said all right. So now 
everything else is here. So I started heading back up 
the block. I saw a couple guys with EMS over by 3 
Financial still. I said, listen, there's nothing over 
there for you guys. I said start heading back the 
other way and get all the equipment. I didn't know 
that everybody had left already. 

So I went into a building that was on Vesey 
between North End and West, and my portable wasn't 
working. I had asked -- I said I'm also going to need, 
you know, I need to know where everybody is, and they 



13 
P. RICHIUSA 



were like, well, where are you? I said I don't really 
know because I couldn't landmark anything. I shut the 
portable off because I wanted to reserve the battery 
because I didn't know how long this was going to be, 
and there was people screaming and yelling all over the 
radio from where they were and nobody knew where 
anything was. So it was kind of chaotic. 

So I went into a store. I tried dialing zero 
on the phone. The operator, there was no answer. I 
guess the phone lines were down. I tried dialing 911. 
There was no answer on that either. So then I just 
started walking up North End and a Hatzolah ambulance I 
saw. I waved at them. They just waved at me and drove 
away. I don't know how far I walked. It was all the 
way up towards Stuyvesant, right in front of Stuyvesant 
High School. I don't know how far up that is. 

That's when my partner was in a Cabrini 
ambulance with a bunch of other guys in plainclothes 
and they found me and they brought me over to Chelsea 
Piers. I still hadn't noticed -- because that's where 
staging had been brought to. Everything was pretty 
chaotic there, also, still at that point, doctors that 
were setting up forward triages and treatment areas and 
there was people everywhere, people that weren't even 



14 
P. RICHIUSA 



involved in the Trade Centers that were just from 
Manhattan that were evacuated to that area. I ran into 
a couple of guys from my stations. I ran back into 
Bobby Abril and he asked me, did you see Carlos? So I 
said no, I never even got a chance to get that far. 

From there we just hung out with each other. 
The union was there. They were doing -- the news was 
there. Everybody was asking is everybody okay and 
this, that and the other thing, is there anybody that 
they know of missing? That's when my partner 
noticed --we went to go get something to drink because 
I had all that powder in my mouth and my eyes and 
everything else. I wanted to get washed off. 

So she said, you know, your shirt's ripped 
and your pants are ripped. I said yeah, it's probably 
just nothing. So she goes let me see, and we pulled 
off my shirt and that's when I saw the laceration on 
the arm and the laceration on the back, which was, I 
don't know, six inches. She goes, oh, you're going to 
need that sewn up. I said, listen, I don't even notice 
that's there, so that's the least of my worries. She 
looked at my leg and it was just a minor abrasion to my 
leg. There was nothing really yet there. 

So from there we went to get something to 



15 
P. RICHIUSA 



drink, came back, and that's when -- I don't know. 
Time was pretty -- like I said, I don't even know what 
time that was. That could have been 2:00, 3:00 o'clock 
in the afternoon. So then I went to -- who was it? I 
think it was Captain Sickles sent me to triage, and 
that's when I got sewn up on my arm. Then I went to 
the hospital that night and I left at 5:30, which I was 
pretty exhausted. I had an accident on the way home, 
too, with the ambulance. 

Q. Really? 

A. Yes. Somebody turned into me. Actually, the 
actor, Bill Nun, changed the tire for me. He was a 
nice guy. He came over there and said, oh, you guys 
had a hard enough day. We asked if they needed us back 
just before that and they said no, and that's when 7 
Trade Center fell. But by that time they said you guys 
are done because we were there for nine hours, ten 
hours at that point. We were pretty exhausted. 

Then we went to Parkway Hospital and they 
made the phone calls to confirm that we were alive 
besides that, and that was pretty much my day that 
day. Then I was out for the two days because I 
couldn't work with the open wounds, with the stitches, 
and then I went into my vacation, which was two days 



16 
P. RICHIUSA 



before my month's vacation. So I spent my whole 
vacation -- and that night, the next night, after I 
went to BHS, my knee swelled up. 

So I went back to the doctor and he said, 
well, you probably just sprained it really good. The 
pain didn't go away for like a week or two. So I went 
to get an MRI and that's when they found the tears in 
the medial and lateral meniscus. So my vacation was 
spent hobbling around. 

Q. Anything else you left out or you can think 
of now that you want to add? 

A. No, nothing that I can remember. 
Q. Okay. 

A. It's all pretty much a blank, that day. 
LIEUTENANT McCOURT: The time is 8:00 
o'clock. That concludes this interview. Thank you. 
EMT RICHIUSA: Thank you. 



File No. 9110306 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMT DAVID CIRA 
Interview Date: December 13, 2001 



Transcribed by Nancy Francis 



D. CIRA 

LIEUTENANT McCOURT: The date is December 
13th, 2001. The time is 9:15. My name is Tom McCourt 
from the New York City Fire Department. We are 
currently at Battalion 45, EMS Command. I'm currently 
interviewing -- 

EMT CIRA: EMT David Cira, Division 4. 

Q. EMT Cira, could you please tell me the events 
that took place on September 11th, 2001, from your 
perspective, please. 

A. Shortly after the first plane was announced 
over the EMS frequency to have hit the first tower, my 
partner and I went 98 from an assignment out of Booth 
Memorial Hospital at Main Street and Booth Memorial 
Avenue. 

Q. Who was your partner? 

A. Felipe Torre. We were working 50 Adam, Tour 
2, Vehicle 466. We were 98 for about three or four 
minutes when the assignment was sent over to our MDT. 
We hit the 63, acknowledged the assignment and headed 
into Manhattan. I entered Manhattan via the Brooklyn 
Bridge and we made -- where is the Brooklyn Bridge? 

Q. It's got to be over this side. 

A. We came down -- this has got to be it . I 
believe we came down John Street, made a right turn 



D. CIRA 

onto Broadway, took that up several blocks, where we 
ended up on the corner of -- where we ended up on Vesey 
and Broadway, made a left turn onto Vesey Street, and 
we were stopped on the corner of Church and Vesey at a 
Citibank. We were flagged down by a woman who had a 
couple of patients, one of whom was complaining of 
chest pain, and various other injuries and whatnot that 
had been patients from the Trade Center itself that had 
gotten outside of the triage sector apparently. We 
were there with a North Shore University Hospital truck 
that was no special designation. They were a transport 
truck that decided to come out on their own. I believe 
one of the crew members was paramedic Adam Schriebman. 
We all began to triage the patients in the area. 

We decided that we were going to move these 
individuals across the street to the north side of 
Fulton and Church, which it's showing here as a 
cemetery, but I remember it to be a Citibank, and we 
started to triage the patients when the building -- we 
looked outside, there was a rush of people coming down 
the block, and someone informed us that the tower was 
coming down. All we could basically do was take 
cover. I lost my partner at that point in time because 
of the rustle and I was trying to shield ourself from 



D. CIRA 

the debris. I lost my partner for somewhere in the 
line of -- I would assume it to be around 13, 14 
minutes. We all had apparently walked up northbound on 
Church Street. Like I said, it took about 15 minutes 
when I finally met up with a Brooklyn bus. 

Q. What was the scene like after the collapse? 

A. Right after? 

Q. Describe that a little bit. 

A. It felt like a snowstorm at 3:00 o'clock in 
the morning. It was absolute, total silence. 
Everybody and everything was covered. We had stumbled 
upon Captain Janice Olszewski, who was in a pile of -- 
it appeared to be just a pile of debris. At that point 
in time -- actually, let me step back a bit. I'm 
actually leaving something out. 

When I had walked up north a bit, I'd met up 
with a Brooklyn bus, I believe either 39 Adam or 39 
Charlie. I'm not sure. They took me back -- after the 
debris started to settle a bit, they took me back 
further south to meet up with my bus again and my 
partner, which was at the intersection of, I guess, 
Fulton and Church, which is where we found Captain 
Olszewski. At that time we had about seven patients at 
the back door of the ambulance that started to gather. 



D. CIRA 

Most of them were police officers. We had Captain 
Olszewski there. We advised her to get into the 
ambulance. She said she was feeling okay and she was 
with another ambulance crew. We had seven people by 
the truck and we just, you know, green tag patients and 
we wanted to get them out of there. 

So we took them out of the borough and we 
took them to Booth Memorial Hospital. We took them 
back there. Our reasons for going there were we had to 
go out of the borough because they were green tag 
patients. Brooklyn wasn't a feasible option because of 
all the traffic coming in and out. So the next best 
thing, we traveled northbound on -- I couldn't tell you 
the avenue. We found our way to the 59th Street 
bridge, which I took to the LIE, and I was -- I 
bypassed Elmhurst and I bypassed St. John's only 
because of the reason -- I bypassed Elmhurst because it 
is a major trauma center and a partial burn unit. I 
figured that, if any major patients were going to start 
spilling into Queens, leave that open, and then we went 
to Booth. It was right off the LIE, it was open, they 
were ready for us. I notified them on my own cell 
phone. 

Then we were seen there at the ER briefly 



D. CIRA 

just to make sure we were okay. We were both covered 
in dust. Our truck was a disaster. But to be honest 
with you, I don't remember much more than that about 
that morning. If you have any other specifics, I'm 
sure you could -- 

Q. Do you remember seeing anybody else other 
than the Captain or anybody? 

A. I saw various EMS workers that I recognized 
just by uniform. Somewhere along the line I remember 
seeing Lieutenant Hadala, but I couldn't tell you what 
street corner I saw him on. He was with Paramedic 
Chevalo Wilson-DeBriano. But I don't remember where I 
saw them and, honestly, the time frame I really 
couldn't tell you because it was just, once those 
buildings came down, it was just -- 

Q. You weren't there for the second building, 
were you? 

A. We were pulling away as that was going on. 
We were being advised by -- we were driving up through 
the crowd. We were trying to get through a crowd with 
a bus full of patients. 

Q. Right. 

A. We were being advised that the second tower 
was coming down, and we did, actually, if I'm not 



D. CIRA 

mistaken, we did see the debris cloud from the second 
building. But were we inside the cloud? No. We were 
cleared by then. 

Q. So you never made it over to the command post 
or anything on the west side? 

A. Never made it near the command post. We were 
assigned to go to West and Vesey. That was our 
original assignment location. We never made it there. 
We were flagged down, thank God. Like I said, we were 
flagged down on like Fulton and Church, somewhere along 
the Fulton and Church vicinity because we were on a 
corner and it was a Citibank. I definitely remember it 
being a Citibank because that's my bank and I just 
happen to remember that's where we were at. 

Like I said, I took those patients to Queens 
and we were seen and we were sent back to the battalion 
and were released -- what is that? LOA, when they 
release you --it was before the end of my tour, but 
they said that's okay, you can go home. Captain Scott 
Holliday was at the battalion and he released us for 
the remainder of the tour. 

Q. All right. Anything else you can think of or 
anything? 

A. I'm sure every time I sit down and tell the 



D. CIRA 

story, I could probably think of something to add into 
it, but those are the basics of it. 

LIEUTENANT McCOURT: Okay. The time is 
0923. That concludes this interview. Thank you very 
much . 



File No. 9110331 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMT DIANE DeMARCO 
Interview Date: December 14, 2001 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



D . DeMARCO 2 

MR. MURAD: Today is December 14th, 
2001. The time is. The time is 0800 hours. 
My name is Murray Murad from the Fire 
Department of the City of New York, and I'm 
conducting an interview with the following 
individual . 

State your name. 

EMT DeMARCO: My name is Diane DeMarco. 
I'm an EMT for the Fire Department. 

MR. MURAD: This interview is being 
conducted at Battalion 15, located at 4109 
White Plains Road. This is regarding the 
events of September 11th, 2001. 
Q. Diane, can you tell us what happened on 
that day? 

A. I was assigned to unit 15 Boy, tour 2 
that morning. I had responded up to the final 
outpost to pick up a partner. When I had arrived 
at the outpost, there was a call given of I think 
it's a 1040, plane into building. Shortly after 
that I was assigned to the job. 

I responded down the West Side Highway, 
and as I was traveling down the West Side Highway 
the second plane had hit the other tower. At 



D . DeMARCO 3 

that point I was traveling to my destination, 
which at the time was Vesey and West for a 
staging, I believe it was. 

Q. Who were you working with that day? 
A. I was working with another EMT, Thomas 
Lopez . 

We had gotten to the location of Vesey 
and West. There was really no one in charge down 
there. We were basically in charge of ourselves, 
which worked out pretty well. We were getting 
out of the vehicle. A supervisor had been 
passing us by. I don't know who he is, where he 
was from, but he had directed us to go into the 
building, the second floor of the building, with 
our equipment. 

I don't know what happened. A couple 
of minutes after that, I saw my partner get his 
bags and start heading towards the building. I 
told him -- I had turned around myself. I had 
started to go get my tech bag, and I realized 
that is not a good idea. So I called Tommy back. 

He came back to the vehicle. And just 
as he came back to the vehicle with me, a couple 
other units had come down and said, "Let's turn 



D . DeMARCO 4 

the vehicles around, " because we were facing into 
the location. So myself and a medic unit -- I 
don't know how many other units -- turned the 
vehicles around. 

Shortly -- I don't know, it would have 
to be minutes, seconds, after we turned the 
vehicle around, the first building fell, the 
first collapse. At that point there was a car 
blocking the area, and I was going to attempt to 
turn that vehicle around. It belonged to a chief 
that had just passed me by. I knew that he was 
in front of the hotel. 

I attempted to walk towards the hotel, 
but just as I attempted to do that the -- I don't 
know what you'd call it, that mushroom, avalanche 
thing was coming at us . I turned around and 
called to my partner. We got back in the vehicle 
and started to pull away from the scene. 

But just at that point, somebody was 
pounding on the glass on the back doors of the 
ambulance. I looked through the rearview mirror, 
and I saw a man in a hazmat suit. But I couldn't 
stop the vehicle because something would have 
happened to either the vehicle or him. 



D . DeMARCO 5 

So I sort of motioned to him, but I 
don't know if he saw me, that I knew he was there 
on the back bumper of the ambulance. So I drove 
off, but I drove off at a steady pace so that I 
wouldn't knock him -- he wouldn't fall off. 

I pulled a few blocks up from there. I 
don't know what location that was. As I 
attempted to go around to the back of the 
vehicle, I saw the man that was on the back 
bumper. He was a sergeant from hazmat, Port 
Authority. At that point he thanked me. He said 
that I saved his life because he couldn't run 
anymore . 

We then proceeded to treat him, my 
partner and I. We just did the normal protocol 
for something like that. He was covered in dust. 
As my partner was treating him, I noticed several 
Fire Department personnel, firemen, walking 
aimlessly or sitting on the corner of where I had 
pulled in. I don't know the location. I was 
safely enough away from the first collapse to 
start treating patients. 

So I started to take firemen off the 
street corners wherever I was finding them. They 



D . DeMARCO 6 

were totally covered in dust, caked, caked on 
their eyelids. So my partner and I again started 
to treat. I think we treated about six people, 
six and EMT from a private hospital. 

As we were doing that, the second tower 
collapsed. So everybody scattered. The patients 
that we were treating scattered, and they started 
running. As we also got in the vehicle and 
started to drive off. I think that's the point 
where I got up to Chambers Street, after the 
second collapse. 

By that point then there was some 
supervisors then on the scene, and they were 
starting to organize things and sending everyone 
up to Chelsea Piers, where we then waited for 
further instructions. 

After that I think it was like around 
6:00 in the evening we were then released to go 
back up to the Bronx. 

Q. When you were there when the south 
tower came down, did you feel anything? Was 
there any indication that the tower was coming 
down? 

A. No. The first tower? 



D . DeMARCO 7 

Q. Right. 

A. No, no. 

Q. When the second tower -- 

A. I just happened to be looking up or out 
towards that direction of the buildings when all 
of a sudden we just noticed that it just dropped 
straight down. Then it got really dark, real 
dark. Things were flying through the air. 

I looked up at the building, and before 
I realized what I was seeing I thought it was 
paper floating through the air. It was people 
jumping from high up, way up high. But then at 
that point we had left that first location of 
Vesey and West. 

Q. So now when the north tower now 
collapsed, did you feel anything? 

A. No. 

Q. Were you just -- 

A. I saw the antenna start to come down, 
because again -- the vehicle was facing north, so 
we were at the back of the ambulance treating 
patients, facing south. The towers were in our 
eye view, so I saw the antenna go down. I don't 
know if that was the first building or the second 



D . DeMARCO 8 

building . 

Q. I think that was on the south tower. 
That was probably the first building. 

A. The first building, yes. I saw the 
antenna start to slide, but we thought at that 
point that it was going to topple over, not go 
straight down. 

The second tower I just recall seeing 
it fall, a cloud of dust. 

Q. The radio communications, were you guys 
directed to use a certain frequency? 

A. We were directed to monitor citywide 
frequency. There wasn't supposed to be any 
transmissions. I followed the those directions; 
I think it's only because of the experience that 
I had. I have 25 years in the street, 21 of them 
with EMS. 

Because of my going to mock disaster 
drills at the airport for my own reasons, because 
when I was working on that side of the Bronx, the 
unit I was working was one of the first units 
that would have gone to an airport incident. So 
I attended those for my own reasons. 



ID . DeMARCO 



And as far as monitoring the radio and 
not talking over the frequency, I had enough 
experience to know what to do and how to handle 
it. So I began giving instructions to my 
partner. We did paperwork. Not a lot of people 
did that. We did ACRs, we did log sheets, we 
kept track of everybody that we treated. 

Unfortunately every time the building 
collapsed or we got word that we had to move from 
the scene, those patients scattered. But I found 
that I ran into two of those patients at least 
twice that morning in different locations, one of 



D. DeMARCO 10 

which had to be -- eventually was transported to 
the hospital. Another one was a fireman that I 
took off the street corner and treated with that 
dust, and then a medic unit came and took him to 
the hospital, somewhere up around Chambers Street 
at that point. 

That's about it, really. I just thank 
God that I had the sense enough to take care of 
myself and my partner, or it would have been a 
disaster. Who knows. I was so close. 

MR. MURAD: This concludes the 
interview. I would like to thank EMT Diane 
DeMarco. The time now is 820 hours, and 
this concludes the interview. Thank you 
very much 



File No. 9110332 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMT DWIGHT SCOTT 
Interview Date: December 14, 2001 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



D. SCOTT ; 

MR. MURAD: Today's date is December 
14, 2001. The time is 74545 hours. I am 
Murray Murad of the Fire Department of the 
City of New York, and I am conducting an 
interview with -- 

EMT SCOTT: Dwight Scott. 
MR. MURAD: And your rank and your 
command, please? 

EMT SCOTT: EMT from Battalion 15. 
MR. MURAD: This interview is being 
conducted at 4109 White Plains Road, 
Battalion 15. This is regarding the events 
on September 11th, 2001. 

Q. EMT Dwight Scott, can you please give 
us your perspective on that day? 

A. I was on a call, minor injury call. 
Then I heard somebody -- the dispatcher said for 
us to go on citywide, monitor, don't say 
anything. I went 82 to the hospital. Then when 
I got to the hospital, I saw a lot of people 
around the television. I went and looked and I 
saw the plane had hit the World Trade Center. 

After finishing the call, we went back 
to the battalion. I asked my lieutenant are we 



D. SCOTT c 

going to be assigned to the World Trade Center. 
He said, "As a matter of fact, you've already 
been assigned." So I grabbed some extra 
equipment, put it on my ambulance. We continued 
to go to the World Trade Center. 

On the way there we heard a lot of 
people crying for help, some people saying, 
"Mayday, mayday, mayday. My ambulance is 
crushed. I can't find my partner." 

So I started to speed up a little bit 
more. We finally got there, and I saw -- the 
last tower was still standing. I went forward, 
tried to advance as much as I can down to the 
site. 

Q. Do you know where you were or did you 
see any officers or were you just actually 
operating on your own? 

A. When we got there at first we saw 
officers. There were different groups of 
command. We kind of advanced until we saw 
somebody that we knew. They told us what was 
going on. They told us to pretty much just stay 
put so they could account for people as 
they're --we were setting up a command post. 



D. SCOTT 4 

That's when the building started to come down. 
Then we had to retreat north. 

I was on the West Side Highway by Vesey 
and West. We started to help firefighters that 
were injured. We saw a couple of them running by 
themselves from a huge cloud, the smoke and the 
dust. We started to help them, irrigate their 
eyes, help walking wounded. We started to bring 
them to the triage station. 

Then after that we heard another unit; 
they were crying for help. We didn't know where 
they were. We tried to advance to where they 
said they might have been, but there was so much 
smoke and dust that we had to retreat. 

When the building started to collapse, 
we pretty much just got up and just ran. 

Q. Which building? That was the north 
tower at that time? 

A. The last one. 

Q. The north tower? 

A. The north tower. The north tower -- I 
was at the bus. As a matter of fact, I even made 
a pact with my partner that if a chief tells us 
to split up we would never split up. When the 



D. SCOTT 



north tower collapsed, he started running one 
way. I called for him and said, "Come on, 
Melvin, Melvin . " He couldn't here me. He just 
started running. 

The ambulance was idling, so I jumped 
in the ambulance and just started driving and 
drove until everything was quiet. Then I turned 
around. Melvin, he had jumped in another 
ambulance. 

Q. Melvin is who? Your partner? 

A. Yeah. 

Q. What's Melvin ' s last name? 

A. Rodriguez. 

Q. Rodriguez? 

A. Yes. 

After we met up again, we went back to 
another command post. Then they said there was a 
secondary explosion or they weren't sure if it 
was a bomb or a gas main. But we all started 
running again. We went north. After that we 
regrouped and set up another triage station 
farther from the site. 

We pretty much stayed around there 
because we weren't sure what was going to happen. 



D. SCOTT 6 

We didn't want to lose any more people. So we 
stayed around. 

Q. When you went down where you were at 
that time, can you just specify? 

A. After the secondary explosion? 

Q. Right. 

A. It was somewhere by -- what's that big 
complex? 

Q. The Winter Garden? American Express 
building? 

A. It was further back, further north. 

Q. To Church Street? 

A. Chelsea Pier, Chelsea Pier. We went to 
Chelsea Pier. We pretty much stayed there 
because they were thinking about secondary 
devices or something might happen. 

Q. Was there any officers that were at 
that time operating there once you guys were 
regrouped over there? 

A. Yes, there were officers there, and 
they took our name and unit number. They tried 
to keep us accountable like to where they were 
and where they wanted us and which direction they 
wanted us to keep the ambulance just in case we 



D. SCOTT 



have to run again. 

Q. Anything else you want to add? 

A. I'll just say that was one of the worst 
experiences I've ever seen in my life, and I hope 
I don't see anything like that again. 

Q. Were you guys operating on a radio 
frequency? 

A. Yes. 

Q. How were the radio communications? 

A. We were on citywide. 

Q. How were the communications? 

A. Communications I think were pretty 
good. On citywide. They did try to keep that 
channel open just in case. There wasn't a lot of 
confusion like the other channels where 
everybody's talking. 

Q. When you were down at Chelsea Pier when 
everyone regrouped -- when you guys regrouped, 
were you then given an assignment or were you 
told just to stay there or what was the actions 
of everybody? 

A. Pretty much to stay, to stand fast, 
because we weren't sure what kind of danger we 
might be in. We weren't sure what kind of danger 



D. SCOTT 8 

we might be in, so they pretty much kept us at 
bay so just in case anything happened they 
wouldn't lose any more members. 

Q. All right. Anything else you feel you 
want to add? All right . 

A. Unless you have other questions. 

Q. No, you mostly answered them, where you 
guys regrouped, what frequencies you were 
operating on, did you see anybody. Any 
individual person that came to mind that you saw 
that comes to your mind or was it just you and 
your partner most of the time? 

A. When you say people, like victims or -- 

Q. Well, if you knew some victims or EMS 
people or fire people. 

A. Yes, a couple of people that we work 
with, a couple firefighters from our area. 

Q. Do you know the names of the EMS people 
or just you know them by sight? 

A. Just by sight. 

Q. So just by sight? 

A. Just by sight. 

Q. All right. You know some of the 
firemen that were responding down there? 



D. SCOTT 

A. Yes. 

Q. Okay. EMT Dwight Scott, I'd like to 
thank you? 

MR. MURAD: The time now is 755 hours, 
and this concludes the interview. Thank 
you . 



File No. 9110333 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
PARAMEDIC ROBERT RUIZ 
Interview Date: December 14, 2001 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



R. RUIZ 2 

MR. CUNDARI: Today's date is December 
14th, 2001. The time is 11:35. I'm George 
Cundari of the New York City Fire 
Department. I'm conducting an interview 
with the following individual. 

Please state your name, rank, title and 
assigned command. 

PARAMEDIC RUIZ: My name is Robert 
Ruiz. I'm a paramedic with the Fire 
Department of New York, and I work at 
Battalion 26 in the Bronx. 
Q. Paramedic Ruiz, can you please tell us 
the events of September 11th from your 
recollection, please? 

A. That morning we had just taken a 
patient to Bronx Lebanon Hospital, and we had 
just cleared from the hospital when the 
dispatcher sent us the assignment to respond down 
to Manhattan. It was kind of odd because we work 
all the way up in the Bronx. They don't ever 
send Bronx units into Manhattan. 

So we were wondering what it was. So 
we switched to citywide frequency. That's when 
we found out something was going on in Manhattan. 



R. RUIZ 3 

We still didn't know what it was. So we turned 
on the news, and we listened to 1010. That's 
when we found out that a plane had struck one of 
the twin towers. 

At that point me and my partner -- we 
didn't think it was terrorism or anything like 
that. We just thought maybe it was some sort of 
a problem with the controls or something like 
that. 

Anyway, we started responding downtown. 
On the way there, halfway there, we hear the news 
that a second plane crashed into the World Trade 
Center. Right then and there we both knew that 
it had to be terrorists because what are the odds 
of two planes crashing into two separate 
buildings. 

So we're driving there. There's a lot 
of traffic, a lot of police, a really long line 
of fire trucks, unmarked cars and ambulances and 
everything. 

Q. How were you getting there? What route 
did you take? 

A. We ended up taking the Grand Concourse 
all the way up to the FDR Drive and then the FDR 



R. RUIZ 4 

Drive all the way down. We ended up having to 
get off around 34th Street, because they had 
blocked off all the -- the traffic wasn't moving, 
so one of the fire trucks blocked all the traffic 
and everybody just went. 

From there everybody just split. 
Everybody just took their own routes. We took a 
pretty good one, so we got there maybe ten 
minutes after that. 

Q. So you took West Street from there? 

A. Right there from 34th Street? Yes. We 
took -- what's the name of that street that's 
right by South Street Seaport underneath the 
drive? I don't know what street that is. 

Q. Allen? 

A. The one that runs underneath the FDR 
Drive, that street there, like the New York Post. 

Q. Pike? 

A. Right, right where the South Street 
Seaport, you know, where the mall is at. So we 
ended up taking that street all the way down. It 
was pretty clear, I remember. So we ended up 
going through there. 

As soon as we got there, we went inside 



R. RUIZ 5 

the tunnel underneath Battery Park, and we came 
out on the other side. When we came out on the 
other side, it was like -- we already saw the 
building on fire from way uptown, maybe 125th 
Street. As we got closer and closer it was like, 
wow, it was amazing. The second plane had 
already hit, so we never saw it when that 
happened. But we already saw the two buildings 
in flame. But as we got closer and closer, you 
see it better and better. 

So when we came out of the tunnel on 
the other side, we were right there. It was 
incredible. We were just amazed that this had 
happened . 

As we see, there's a line forming of 
ambulances up on West Street and -- it is West 
Street, but it wasn't Liberty. There was another 
street there. What's the next street after 
Liberty? 

Q. Still south of the World Trade Center? 
A. Yes. It wasn't Liberty, because -- or 
could it have been Liberty? Was it just that 
big? Oh, yeah, so it was Liberty. There had to 
be like another bridge there. I remember the 



R. RUIZ 6 

bridge. 

Q. There's a walkway over here by Vesey. 
A. I remember this. That's where we were. 
Okay. 

There's a couple of commanders, chiefs, 
captains at Liberty and West Street. We came out 
of the tunnel, and we ended up on the West Side 
Highway. We went up to the back of the line. 
Before we got to the back of the line, like 
people describe it, there were body parts all 
over the floor. 

I saw pieces of scalp and entire torsos 
and legs, hands, just about everything. I never 
saw a face, but I saw just about every other part 
you can think of. It was like an obstacle course 
to get to this line that they had formed at 
Liberty and West Street. 

It can't be Liberty and West Street. 
It has to be like right by the hotel. Right over 
here, right in that corner, that's where it was. 
The line didn't start on Liberty and West Street; 
it was a little bit further up, maybe by the 
Marriott. Maybe right around there, maybe a 
little bit before that. 



R. RUIZ 7 

Q. So you're right by the towers at that 
point? 

A. No, we never made it to the towers. 
I'm going to tell you what happened. 

It was like an obstacle course to get 
to the end of the line, to the back of the line. 
What they were doing is they were getting 
patients, throwing them in the back of the bus, 
and then the bus would just take off. 

Q. These are all walking wounded coming to 
you? 

A. That's right. 

Then the captains and chiefs, they were 
directing people everywhere. It was total chaos. 
So that's just what we did. 

As soon as we got to the back of the 
line, these firemen come running from the 
building right on Liberty and -- right on Liberty 
and West Street, there's a building there. I'm 
not quite sure whether it was a church or not. 
It didn't look like a church. I remember it had 
a lot of scaffolding on it. 

They come running from the building, 
and he starts yelling at us. He said, "Help, 



R. RUIZ 8 

help, help, we need your help. One of our guys 
got hit with some debris that fell off a 
building." My partner was driving that day and 
he said, "Okay, no problem." 

We get off the line, and we park right 
on Liberty Street now. Right on Liberty Street, 
there's a parking lot there. He parks there, 
gets out of the bus, runs to the back and gets a 
trauma bag. He goes, gets the trauma bag and 
runs out and goes inside the building. 

Now, I get out. I jumped inside the 
back of the bus, and I'm getting the rest of the 
equipment. I'm getting the oxygen bag, I've got 
the monitor, I've got a couple trauma dressings 
and stuff, and I'm putting it on top of the 
stretcher. I jumped out with the stretcher and 
everything. 

I go to the building where he went, but 
there's a few entrances on that corner and I 
don't know where exactly he went. So I see some 
firemen almost on the other side of the building 
on the other corner. I go and I approached them 
and said, "Which way did my partner go?" He 
said, "We don't know what you're talking about." 



R. RUIZ 9 

So now my partner's inside the 
building, and he probably needs the equipment and 
I don't know where he is. 

Q. What's your partner's name? 
A. Joe Jefferson. 

I can't tell you the times that all 
this is happening because I really -- 
Q. Time is lost? 

A. Right, time is lost. All I know is 
that the building hadn't fallen yet. 

So I approached these guys. They told 
me they don't know who I'm talking about and 
whatever. So what I do is I end up standing 
right in the middle, because if he comes out of 
any exit I can just run to him, throw the guy on 
the stretcher and just leave from there. So that 
was the plan. 

As I'm waiting there -- I must have 
waited a good five minutes. Then the firemen I 
had just spoken to, they go and they run into the 
World Trade Center number two. So they run 
across the street into the building. 

Right after them, you see three FBI 
agents, two men and a woman, run right after 



R. RUIZ 10 

them, and they also go inside the World Trade 
Center. I'm just standing right there in the 
center, and I'm looking up. I'm like, oh, man, 
you know, just dumbfounded. This is such an 
amazing sight. 

I don't know what else I was thinking. 
It was just incredible. It was just one of those 
things you look at and you just have your mouth 
wide open saying, "I can't believe I'm here 
witnessing something like this." I said, man, 
you know, this is real history, and wondering 
where my partner is and what's the matter with 
this guy. 

All of a sudden I see a plain clothes 
cop come and stand right on the corner. So this 
is now Washington and Liberty. He's right on 
that corner, and he's looking up. He looks at 
me, and we just both nod in disbelief. We just 
keep staring like -- this happened in a matter of 
like five minutes, the firemen running in, the 
FBI right behind and then the plain clothes cop 
on the corner. 

The next thing you know, you hear a 
loud thundering noise. It sounded like a jet, a 



R. RUIZ 11 

big rumble. I start looking around and I'm like, 
what is that? The next thing I know, I see the 
cop just take off. I'm like, where 's he going? 

Then I see the things on the floor, 
like Liberty -- you know, just like the movies, 
bouncing up and jumping and shaking. I mean, not 
like an earthquake, like a 6 point something or 
something like that. But you see stuff on the 
floor shaking from side to side. I'm like, oh, 
my God. I look up and I was saying, oh, no, the 
building's going to fall down. 

Let me tell you, you talk about being 
scared, never in my life -- I don't think ever 
again I'll ever be so scared. So I turn around. 
Right where I'm standing I turn around. I'm in 
the center of the building. I turn around, and I 
try to go inside the building, but that door 
happens to be locked. So I run towards the 
corner where the cop was, and I keep trying all 
the doors. 

All the doors and all the windows are 
locked, and I can't break any of the windows to 
get in because they have metal gates on them. So 
even if I was to break a window to get in, I 



R. RUIZ 12 

can't get in. So I keep running, running, keep 
trying the doors. 

I make it to the corner. I make it to 
the corner, and I turn right. So I was going to 
keep running all the way straight up Washington. 
So I ran maybe a few feet when I tripped and I 
fell on something, some debris. I don't know 
what it was. But I ended up falling. 

By now the sound is just getting louder 
and louder and louder. I said, oh, man, this 
building is going to fall on me right now. What 
do I do? I got up, and I just -- this is like a 
split second. I said I can't keep running 
straight up, because you have this building right 
here on Washington. What is it? Bankers Trust 
Plaza, 130 Liberty Street? It takes up the 
entire block. So I can't run like in a diagonal. 

What I wanted to do is I didn't want to 
run straight up; I wanted to go diagonally to get 
out of the -- because I figured this building was 
falling, it was tumbling over. I didn't think it 
was falling down on top of itself. 

Q. So you had a feeling the building was 
coming down right away? 



R. RUIZ 13 

A. Yeah. 

Q. Is that what you first thought? 

A. Yeah. The sound, it's just loud. At 
first it's (sound) and then you feel everything 
around you -- not around you but the floor. You 
feel the floor trembling and shaking. You look 
at the floor, the dirt, the sand and everything 
on the floor shifting from side to side. I'm 
like, oh, man. 

Then the cop takes off. He runs. Then 
I hit the corner, I turn the corner, a few feet I 
fall. By this time the sound is so, so, so loud, 
I think oh, my God. I never looked back, because 
I figured if I looked back that was going to be 
it, I'd freeze or be hit with something. I said, 
look, I don't want to waste any time. Whatever 
it is I'm going to do, I've got to do it quickly. 

So I saw the building. I saw that I 
couldn't run. I saw that if I kept running 
straight -- the map here, it doesn't look big at 
all. But this was like a really long block for 
me to keep running and running and running and go 
around the corner on the other side. 

So what I ended up doing was there was 



R. RUIZ 14 

a door right on that corner, and the door was 
locked. It also had a gate, a wrought iron fence 
gate. I kept trying to open, open, open, open, 
and I couldn't open. I said, oh, my God, this is 
going to be it. 

The way they made the door is it's like 
a cutout in the building. It's like about a foot 
wide of wall before you hit the door. So it was 
like a little corner. What I ended up doing was 
I ended up hiding inside that little corner 
there. I ended up going inside that little door 
well and hiding up against the wall facing the 
World Trade Center building and hiding right in 
that corner. 

As soon as I did that, the next thing I 
know, all the dust; the dust, the dirt. I said, 
oh, my God, this is it. That's all I kept 
thinking: Oh, my God, oh, my God, I'm going to 
die here. This building's going to fall on top 
of me. It's going to fall on top of this 
building and squash it and this is it. All you 
hear is all this rumbling. The rumbling, the 
rumbling, the rumbling, that's all you heard. 
The rumbling and the smoke. 



R. RUIZ 15 

In a matter of seconds it was from 
daytime to complete, complete darkness, something 
straight out of a movie. 

Q. So that doorway protected you? 
A. Yeah. It saved my life. 

But while I was in there, I was getting 
hit with stuff. You heard it, and you heard 
glass breaking and stuff -- there was so much 
noise, you couldn't distinguish one thing 
happening. But when it happened close to me, I 
could hear it, like glass breaking. 

But the biggest problem there was I 
couldn't breathe. The smoke was really, really 
hot, and I couldn't catch my breath. So I ended 
up taking off my shirt and wrapping it around my 
face, trying to get some air, but I couldn't. 

What I remember is, oh, man, I'm going 
to die here and -- who will protect my family. I 
was wondering how does it feel to be dead. 
That's what I remember thinking while I was stuck 
in that corner. I was just like I'm ready for 
it. I wasn't so calm like I am right now, but I 
remember thinking this while I was there. 

The only words I remember saying is, 



R. RUIZ 16 

oh, my God oh, my God, over and over and over, 
and trying to pull the fence off so I could get 
inside, but there was no way. There was no way 
for me open the door. It was locked. I was just 
trapped there. So I was just waiting for the big 
impact that was just going to take me out. 

Miraculously the building stopped 
falling. The noise completely stopped. But the 
smoke kept coming. I was having a real, real bad 
time breathing. The shirt wrapped around my face 
wasn't helping at all, because it was saturated 
in that dust as well. 

I'm saying, oh, my God, what do I do? 
Do I stay here? Do I try to run out? But then I 
thought if I run out of that little corner I'm 
going to get hit with the rest of the stuff 
that's flying. I was trapped there. 

Like things weren't bad enough already, 
the car that's parked right on that corner 
catches on fire. I don't mean a little fire, the 
entire thing. Don't ask me how. The entire car 
caught on fire. You would think maybe just a 
motor part or just the engine part. But this 
entire car just goes up in fire. 



R. RUIZ 17 

I'm like, oh, my God, what's happening? 
I didn't get squashed and I'm going to suffocate 
here and now I'm going to burn. The smoke was 
real hot. The smoke was real, real hot. I 
thought about, oh, man, if I keep breathing the 
smoke in, my larynx is going to swell and I'm 
going to suffocate like that, and all attached to 
crazy things I'm thinking. Forget about it. 

Now it was the car. Then I can't stand 
it anymore because it's getting real, real, real 
hot. I'm like, oh, man, I've got to get out of 
here. This thing is cooking me. Now thanks to 
the car fire -- because it was so big, I could 
see now. Before then I couldn't see anything. 
It was literally like people say you stick your 
hand right in front of your face and you couldn't 
see it. Now with this car fire, I could see a 
few feet in front of me. 

I got out of the door well there, and I 
walked a little bit. I notice that there were 
windows there as well, but the windows had gates 
on them. All the stuff that fell knocked the 
gates off the building. So the windows weren't 
there anymore, the gates weren't there. 



R. RUIZ 18 

All I had to do was break a little bit 
of glass that was left there, and I ended up 
jumping inside the building, because you couldn't 
walk in the street. I was right along like the 
edge. It's really hard to describe. It was like 
a mountain of stuff. 

I was walking right alongside the 
building, and I ended up going inside there. 
There was no gate. I tried to remember where 
were the gates, and I didn't see the gates at 
all. That whole corner was full of windows with 
gates. 

It turns out that it was a restaurant. 
The only reason I know is I ended up going inside 
of it . I must have been there like a good 20 
minutes, because I couldn't find my way around. 
I kept falling over tables and chairs. That's 
how I found out it was a restaurant. At one time 
I tried to yell for help. I was like, "Help!" I 
said, oh, man, what am I doing? I am the help 
here. Who's going to help me? 

Q. Nobody answered while you were in 
there? 

A. No, no, there was nobody there. The 



R. RUIZ 19 

people, I guess when the first plane hit, locked 
up and just took off. 

So I'm in there a good 15 minutes, good 
20 minutes, and I'm trying to find my way around. 
It's like you've got no sense of coordination 
because you don't know in which direction you're 
going. You're just bouncing into stuff and 
trying to look for a wall. I remember feeling a 
counter. Then I would fall on a table or trip on 
a table, on a chair, get back up. 

Q. Was your radio working at this point? 
A. I'm going to get to that right now. 

So then when I yell for help, I'm like, 
oh, man, there's nobody here. So I go and I 
reach for my radio, but there's no more radio. I 
don't know where the radio is, where it went. 
Don't ask me where I lost it. 

I usually keep my radio real secure. 
That's something I've always had that -- ever 
since I started working there, I always kept the 
radio secure. I don't know, I lost it, maybe 
when I fell or maybe climbing in through the 
window or I had already fallen a few times. 

The reason I was yelling for help was 



R. RUIZ 20 

because I still hear stuff falling. You could 
still hear stuff falling. I said, man, I don't 
know if the whole building fell. I didn't know 
what the story was. 

I thought at that point that only half 
the building had fallen off, because I was still 
there. I said, oh, my God, only half the 
building fell. The rest of the building is going 
to fall. I thought it maybe broke in half and 
just fell down. I didn't think it just crumbled 
onto itself. 

Anyway, I start feeling around, and I 
see a light. I was saying, oh, yeah, that's the 
way out. I ended up walking towards the light. 
It's kind of silly. It ended up being a 
refrigerator full of Snapple. It was kind of 
stupid. Oh, man, I got so mad when I saw that. 

Q. Did you need a drink? 

A. No, I didn't want a drink. I tell 
everybody that part about the Snapple. I said, 
you know, I thought it was light. I thought it 
was the way out, and it turns out to be a giant 
refrigerator full of Snapple. I got so mad at 
that point. 



R. RUIZ 21 

Anyway, I turn around and I end up 
looking inside there. I eventually find a little 
corridor, and I followed the corridor all the 
way, all the way, all the way. I ended up coming 
out in the same building, but I ended up coming 
out on some windows further south on Washington. 

So now I'm in between the block. I'm 
halfway in the building. So I ended up coming 
out of some broken windows that were there. Now 
I'm on Washington again. I look back, and I look 
at everything that was -- and I could still see 
where it was, because of the fires. It was just 
like a movie. There were fires scattered all 
over. 

I remember there was a row of police 
cars, and they were all smashed. I was like, 
remember that plain clothes cop that was running? 
There could have been no way that he made it, 
because the guy was right in front of me. I'm 
talking about he was right there. I'm right 
behind him. I fall, I get back up, I hide inside 
that little corner, and then everything just 
starts falling. 

So I was like, oh, man, that poor guy. 



R. RUIZ 22 

I was even thinking of maybe even trying to look 
for him. It was like you couldn't see anything 
there. 

So I got out of the window, and I 
walked down Washington -- I didn't walk. What am 
I saying I walked? I ran. As soon as I got out, 
I ran. I ran and ran and ran and ran and ran. I 
ended up at the entrance to the tunnel. Where is 
the entrance of the tunnel here? 
Q. It's off the page here. 
A. Let me tell you how I ran. But I ran 
and ran, and finally I could see the light. When 
I got to where the tunnel was, I'm looking 
everywhere. It was just like that movie the day 
after with the atomic bomb. They drop it and 
nobody's left and I'm the only one. That's 
exactly how it was. 

I'm looking and like, "Hello?" I'm 
looking. "Anybody?" No cars moving, no birds, 
not one other person, nothing at all. 
Everything's abandoned, everything's left, and 
I'm just stuck there. I'm like, oh, my God, what 
do I do? I said, what do I do now? 

Then I remembered Jefferson. I was 



R. RUIZ 23 

like, oh, my God, Jefferson. What happened to 
Jefferson? What I ended up doing is when I hit 
that tunnel, I ended up going back on West 
Street. I was still trying to catch my breath, 
so I was taking it easy. But I started walking 
back to that building where I was. 

I'm coughing, I'm coughing, I'm walking 
and everything. As I started getting closer and 
closer, that's when I start seeing people. I 
start seeing people scattered everywhere: a 
fireman here, a guy in a business suit there; 
just very, very little people. 

When I got to the building that I was 
in but on the other side -- we're now on West 
Street -- I go in. As soon as I go in, who's 
behind the door? Jefferson. He's in there. I'm 
like, oh, man. But I didn't recognize him 
because the guy was completely black. What he 
was doing, he was helping out one of our other 
guys who got hit with stuff and had something 
stuck in his chest and he had broken his arm. 

So there was him and maybe three or 
four other guys attending to him. So he was 
hurt, and somebody else was hurt that I remember. 



R. RUIZ 24 

I didn't really pay too much attention because I 
was still trying to catch my breath. 

All this happens real quickly. I was 
stuck in the building for a while. But as soon 
as I got out, I ran, went to the tunnel entrance 
and ended up going back to the other side of the 
building. I find them. They're taking care of 
him. 

So they ended up taking this guy, 
throwing him in an ambulance that didn't get 
smashed. Our bus was completely totaled, because 
we were parked right here on Liberty. It's 
demolished. So they take him out and put him 
inside an ambulance, and they take off. So 
everybody ends up leaving. 

Now, Jefferson comes back to see how I 
am. When he comes back in there, it's completely 
empty. Now all of a sudden we see this big group 
of people come out; I'd say about maybe 15 
people, about 17 people. I'm like, oh, man, we 
thought we were in there all by ourselves. 

Somebody had brought a bucket, and it 
had water in it . I just stayed by the bucket, 
trying to drink some water. I tried to clear my 



R. RUIZ 25 

passages out, because I couldn't breathe. I was 
coughing, coughing up that black stuff. 

Anyway, so these people come out of a 
closet or there was a doorway or something. 
We're like, oh, my God, what are you people doing 
here? We started talking to them. They told us 
to leave, but then the building started coming 
down and we got scared and they hid. 

There was a lady with a baby, a guy 
with some cats, some other guys that said they 
were students from I don't know where, and there 
was this other girl, an EMT, from Metro Care. 

What we ended up doing is me and 
Jefferson, we end up leaving the building. I'm 
feeling a little better now than I did originally 
from the smoke and stuff. So I take the T-shirt 
off. No, that's a lie. Someone takes a T-shirt 
off and rips it, and now we make masks out of 
that. We put these white pieces of -- we put it 
on our face to try to protect ourselves from the 
smoke. 

We go and we end up walking back on the 
West Side Highway. We leave those people there 
with the EMT from Metro Care. We end up walking 



R. RUIZ 26 

a little bit. What we were going to try to do 
was to try to find -- oh, no, that's a lie. Oh, 
my God, I can't believe I forgot it. 

Even before we found that, we found the 
people. As soon as we found the people, we hear 
it again, the rumbling. Right, I forgot all 
about that. We hear the rumbling. I was like, 
oh, my God, Joe, the rest of the building is 
falling down. 

We all run, and we all try to get as 
much as we can inside this building where we are 
now. We hide in a closet or something. The 
walls are all full of glass. So we're thinking 
that this glass is going to break. All you see 
is the thing moving. Later on we found out that 
was the second building that was falling down. 
We thought and I thought that the first one is 
still -- the rest of it is falling down. 

So anyway, when this one finished 
falling, we waited a little while. Then that's 
when we came out. That's when we came out. We 
must have walked for maybe a block or two. We 
found a school bus there, like one of those mini 
school buses. 



R. RUIZ 27 

So we go in, and we were looking at all 
the cars to see if we could find some 
transportation or something. We were picking up 
equipment as we went along. We found a radio, we 
found gloves, we found a life pack, a bag. We 
were picking up equipment as we went along. 

So we end up finding a school bus. We 
go inside the school bus, and we find a lady 
inside there hiding. Why this lady didn't turn 
the school bus around and leave that area, I 
don't know. I guess everybody handles it 
differently. So we told the lady that we were 
going to borrow her school bus. 

So what we end up doing is we end up 
taking the school bus. Joe jumps in the driver's 
seat, and we end up going as close as we can to 
this building. Now, we go in there, and we end 
up taking all those people out, throwing them in 
the school bus and then just taking off. 

So we end up taking off, and we end up 
driving back down the West Side Highway to the 
tunnel and all the way around to the FDR Drive. 
Now, we end up taking the drive all the way up to 
Bellevue Hospital. 



R. RUIZ 28 

Once we got to Bellevue Hospital, we 
dropped the people off. Then me and Joe talked 
it over, what are we going to do now? Are we 
going to go home? I was like, I don't know. I 
don't know. What do you want to do? We talked 
about it for a few minutes. I said, look, let's 
go back. We just wanted to go back to help, see 
what we could do. 

We ended up getting back in the school 
bus, and the lady doesn't want to go back down 
there, and we don't blame her. So what we end up 
doing, we left her and the school bus by the 
Brooklyn Bridge, and from the Brooklyn Bridge we 
had the life pack and we had the monitor we had 
found. We had the life pack and the trauma bag 
that we had found. We ended up walking all the 
way back down to the twin towers site. 

When we got back to the twin towers 
site, it was still a lot of smoke but not like 
when everything had initially fallen down. So 
what we end up doing is me and the firemen that 
were there, whoever was left, we end up just 
digging. We just started digging. 

A chief came by - - I forget who it 



R. RUIZ 29 

was -- and he tried to make a team, tried to make 
teams of groups of people, but those things just 
fell apart. As soon as he left, everybody 
decided to do what they wanted to do. 

Me and Jefferson decided to stay 
together and, when the smoke cleared, just 
started digging. Then there's like no way to 
dig. All we can do is walk around and try to 
listen to see if you heard something. 

It looked like somebody had taken like 
a broomstick and taken all the debris and 
everything and pushed it all the way up onto the 
buildings that were across the street from the 
World Trade Center. 

This street was more or less clean, 
like the highway, right around here was like a 
giant mountain. I don't know what building it 
was, this building right here. Everything had 
piled up over here, up on top of the buildings 
over here. 

So we ended up staying there. We found 
a couple of helmets from people, firemen. One 
EMS helmet, we ended up taking that one back to 
the station. That's what we did all day. 



R. RUIZ 30 

Then around 6, 7:00, my leg was 
hurting, my shoulder was hurting, this whole 
side. I couldn't hardly walk. I was like I 
can't really move my arm anymore. Joe said, "Do 
you want to go to the emergency room?" I said, 
"I don't know." 

I ended up pulling up my pant leg, and 
my calf must have been the size of a 
grapefruit -- no, bigger. It was real swollen. 
I decided to go to the emergency room. This is 
like about 6:00, 6 p.m. or 6:30. 

So we ended up walking there too, 
because there was no transportation at all. We 
went to New York Downtown Hospital. We end up 
going to that hospital. They rush me in. They 
rush my partner in. They asked us, "What 
happened to you? Where do you feel pain?" I 
said, "I feel pain in my leg, my knee. I feel 
pain in my shoulder, right here in my ribs." 

They take my clothes off, start 
examining me, and say, "Oh, yeah, your leg is 
pretty bad." They started looking at my 
shoulder, and they said, "It looks like you might 
have broken a bone here or something." 



R. RUIZ 31 

When all this had happened earlier, I 
didn't feel anything. I don't know why it was. 
They took x-rays and found out that my collar 
bone was broken. They said I broke the AC joint 
as well. They said no broken bones in my legs or 
my ribs or anything, just the shoulder got messed 
up. 

The only thing I can think of is that 
little piece of wall that didn't hide me 
completely, because it wasn't wide enough, so I 
imagine maybe something -- I remember stuff 
flying everywhere and falling next to me, but I 
don't remember feeling pain or getting hit with 
anything. Maybe it's because I couldn't breathe 
or what it was. 

While we were taking the people out of 
the building and while we were looking for stuff, 
trying to find anybody that we can find in the 
rubble or anything, looking inside cars and all 
types of -- nothing. I was walking with a little 
limp, but I thought it was just nothing until 
later on during the day. 

From there, once I got discharged from 
the hospital -- they put my arm in a sling and 



R. RUIZ 32 

told me to put I believe heat on and then after 
that put cold and then go see an orthopedic 
doctor the next day, they gave me somebody to go 
see. 

Now it was how do I get home? 
Q. Did you ever end up calling home all 
that time? 

A. I tried to call -- I ended up -- oh, 
this is so funny. I had a cell phone in my 
pocket. After we came back from Bellevue, I said 
let me try to call home. The cell phones weren't 
working. Everything was completely -- I'm 
telling you, it was completely shut down. 

After maybe an hour or two, I got a 
signal, so I ended up calling. It just so 
happens that I hadn't charged my phone. So I was 
on low cells. So I called my girlfriend. She 
picked up the phone and she said, "How are you?" 

It's so funny, because on my way down 
to the World Trade Center I called her and I was 
like, "Look, I'm going down to the World Trade 
Center." She said, "No, don't go." I was like, 
"Look, they told me to go. They assigned me 
there." She's like, "Be careful, be careful." 



R. RUIZ 33 

Then from there she never heard from me again. 

Now I said, "Oh, you don't know what's 
happened to me. Oh, my God, I almost died." I'm 
trying to tell her the story. I said, "Look, 
it's going to cut off." It cuts off, and then 
that was it. 

That's when everything else started. 
We started looking for people and stuff like 
that. I took about an hour or two taking -- I 
had a lot of glass in my hands. My hands are 
fine now, but they were destroyed. I don't know 
how I got so much glass in my hand. I figured 
maybe I was trying to break the glass with my 
hands or something, but I don't remember. 

I don't know, but my hands, if you saw 
them, they looked like -- they were completely 
messed up. So there I was, trying to irrigate 
and going through every cut, picking the glass 
out of my hands. That took about an hour. 

Then we would go and look inside cars, 
look inside the fire engines, the flipped-over 
SUVs, everything. There was really nothing we 
could do, just the little bit we did. We took 
those people out of that building, so I guess we 



R. RUIZ 34 

did a little bit of our part. 

As far as finding anybody after that, 
nothing. Then when I got discharged from the 
emergency room, we had no way to get home. We 
were stranded, so we started walking. Jefferson 
ran into somebody that works there at New York 
Downtown Hospital. They said they would try to 
get us as far as Bellevue and then from there 
maybe we could get a ride from one of our own 
units there. 

As it turns out, they didn't call them 
right away. I don't think they were logged on or 
whatever the case was. They ended up taking us 
all the way to the station. You don't know how 
happy I was when I heard that he was going to do 
that favor for us, because by that time I had 
really had just about enough by the end of the 
day. 

So we get to the station, and there's 
just a giant crowd of people. Everybody that 
works at the station was like, "Oh, my God, we 
thought you guys were dead. We thought you guys 
were just --" I guess they might have done roll 
call on the radio, something like that, and they 



R. RUIZ 35 

hadn't heard from us. 

So when they saw us, they were happy, 
clapping. I told the story once, and then that 
was it. I was like I really don't want to talk 
about it anymore. I just want to go home. 

By that time Jefferson had lent me his 
phone and I had called my family, and they were 
on their way there. So I was in five or ten 
minutes and they got there. My girlfriend 
Tamara, my brother, my sister, they all came. 
They hugged me and everything. 

It was definitely something I don't 
ever want to live through again. That's how the 
day ended. That was my World Trade Center 
experience. 

Q. Thank you for taking the time to 
conduct this interview. 

MR. CUNDARI: It is 12:12, and this 
concludes this interview. 



File No. 9110334 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMT KEVIN McLEON 
Interview Date: December 15, 2001 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



K. McLEON 2 

MR. ECCLESTON: Today is December 15, 
2001. The time is 25 minutes past the hour 
of 12. My name is Christopher Eccleston of 
the New York City Fire Department, World 
Trade Center Task Force. I'm conducting an 
interview with the following individual. 

Please state your name, rank and shield 
number. 

EMT McLEON: EMT Kevin McLeon, 5758. 
Q. Were you assigned to the World Trade 
Center disaster on September 11th? 
A. Yes. 

Q. Can you tell me in your own words about 
the events of that day? 

A. That morning I was late for work. I 
got stuck in traffic and was late for work. The 
alarm had gone on as soon as I got here. We 
pulled up the block, and we were a block from the 
station when we realized there was something 
going on. There was a large crowd gathering in 
the street. 

We parked our ambulance and we got out 
of the ambulance, and we looked up and we 
realized the World Trade Center was on fire. 



K. McLEON 3 

That's when the calls started coming in. 

My partner managed to get us on the 
call, with all the radio traffic, and we 
responded down to the World Trade Center. In 
doing so started to hear all the mass confusion 
about what was going on. Lieutenant Davila was 
the first lieutenant down on the scene, screaming 
for EMS units, crying that this was a hard hat 
operation. We knew something was really going 
on. 

As we got closer to the World Trade 
Center, we realized this is really something of a 
large magnitude we have never seen before. We 
pull up 84, and we were actually on the opposite 
side of where the staging was, which probably 
saved our lives. 

Davila was on one side of the station, 
one side of the building, and we were on the 
other side. We got out and started to pull our 
equipment out. 

Q. Can you just indicate on the map 
provided approximately where you parked your 
vehicle? 

A. Church and maybe Cortlandt, Dey, 



K. McLEON 



somewhere. 

Q. Okay. So Church, somewhere in between 
Cortlandt and Dey? 

A. Somewhere in between there. 

Q. Okay. And you were in vehicle -- 

A. 69. 

Q. --69. Thank you. 

A. We pulled our equipment out and started 
to stage in front of the building. We started to 
distribute equipment for triage. We had one or 
two patients who had a piece of the building that 
fell on his shoulder. We started to bring him to 
ambulance when all of a sudden we heard a large 
explosion. That explosion turned out to be 
subsequently the second plane hitting. 

We threw him and two other patients in 
the back of the ambulance and started to do 
triage in the back of the ambulance. It was a 
safe haven. We ended up driving three more 
patients. The last patient was a burn patient. 
Since she really couldn't wait around, we decided 
to take the five that we had, hit our 82 and go 
to the hospital. 

Q. What hospital did you transport these 



K. McLEON 5 

patients to? 

A. We went to Cornell. 

Q. Cornell? 

A. The burn patient we had had second and 
third degree burns. It has a really good trauma 
center. So for the first time we went to 
Cornell. When we got to Cornell, that's when we 
heard the towers had collapsed. 

We quickly finished what we had at 
Cornell, made our way back down to -- we started 
making our way down and managed to get down to 
South and -- it was South of Canal, near the 
seaport. We were down there. You could see the 
towers had collapsed and saw the smoke and all 
the people running out towards us. We were just 
bogged down in so much traffic we couldn't get 
through. . 

We couldn't get our way through because 
of all the traffic and all the people. We had 
been hearing there were three staging areas being 
set up. We managed to stage at Chelsea Piers. 
But from that point on we managed to 
get ourselves up to Chelsea Piers. We didn't do 
anything for the rest of the day. We sat there 



K. McLEON 6 

and we waited like bumps on logs. That was our 
claim to fame. That's all we really did. 

Q. When you initially arrived on the 
scene, were there other people at your location 
when you arrived on Church between Dey and -- 

A. There were other BLS units and a couple 
of medic units from Cabrini on the same side as 
we were. They had already started to set up a 
triage and gather patients. 

Q. Do you know any of these other people? 
Would you know them by name? 

A. I remember seeing one of them, a guy 
named Andy, who was a medic. I remember him. We 
also started to gather our patients. Then when 
we heard the large explosion, we took all we had, 
put them in our ambulances, and waited for it to 
die down a couple more seconds, got out, gathered 
more patients. Then I split, and after that I 
don't know what anybody did. 

Q. Do you know approximately what time it 
was that you went 82? 

A. It was probably somewhere in the area 
of 9 - - somewhere around 9:30, 9:40, because 
actually we were up -- at 10 to 10 we were 



K. McLEON 7 

already up at Cornell with the five people, the 
five patients. We were up at Cornell probably 
about quarter to 10, 10 to 10. We were up at 
Cornell already, because we stayed there long 
enough to hear the buildings had collapsed. 

I guess it was gut-wrenching to know we 
couldn't get closer down to the scene as we 
wanted and wound up getting sent down to Chelsea 
Piers and then we sat there doing absolutely 
nothing for the rest of the day, when you're 
knowing that people from our own station were 
down at the site doing more than you. 

That was really it. That was -- I took 
care of five people. That's it. 

Q. Is there anything else you'd like to 
add to this interview? Anything at all? 

A. We'll never see something like this 
again for the rest of our lives. My partner and 
I really were more mad at the fact that we 
couldn't get down there. We both knew we did the 
right thing for our patients, especially the burn 
victim, because if the burn victim didn't come 
along, we were going to go to the nearest trauma 
center, dump them off and then get back to the 



K. McLEON 8 

game. She came along at the last second, and we 
both made the decision that she's got to go to 
the burn center. That's what kept us out of 
there. 

That's about it. 
Q. Okay. 

MR. ECCLESTON: This interview is being 
concluded at 33 minutes past 12. The 
counter on the recorder reads 139. 
Thank you very much. 



File No. 9110335 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMT JODY BELL 
Interview Date: December 15, 2001 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



J. BELL 2 

MR. ECCLESTON: Today's date is 
December 15th, 2001. The time is 1:05 a.m. 
my name is Christopher Eccleston of the New 
York City Fire Department, World Trade 
Center Task Force. I am conducting an 
interview with the following individual. 

Please state your name, rank and shield 
number. 

EMT BELL: My name is Jody bell, EMT, 
shield number 5209. 

Q. Mr. Bell, were you assigned to the 
World Trade Center disaster on 9/11? 
A. Yes, I was. 

Q. Can you please tell me in your own 
words about the events of that day? 

A. I was due in at work at 0900 hours. So 
being a resident from Staten Island, I commuted 
that day on the ferry. So I was aboard the 8:00 
ferry leaving Staten Island. So I reached the 
city at approximately 8:30. I had my car on the 
ferry. 

A funny thing is I bumped into my 
partner on the boat. Being that it was Tuesday, 
we were just talking about Monday night football, 



J. BELL 3 

just looking forward to a good day. He had just 
come off a three-day swing. We were just looking 
forward to a good day, because the weather was 
nice and everything was pretty good. Everything 
was going fine. 

As I'm driving to work -- 
Q. Who was your partner that day? 
A. Mike Mejias, Michael Mejias. 
Q. Okay. 

A. As I'm driving to work, at around a 
quarter to, I noticed that the traffic was 
getting heavy. I'm saying to myself I might be 
late. I'm wondering why there's all this 
traffic, because there's never this much traffic. 
This is my usual routine. 

That's when we noticed a whole bunch of 
police cars responding somewhere. So at first we 
just -- we were thinking that maybe it ' s a bad 
car accident or something of that nature. My 
partner said he noticed people looking up in the 
air. I was concentrating on getting to work. 
I'm trying to get there on time. 

As we moved closer to the battalion, 
we're about two blocks away, and I see all the 



J. BELL 4 

ambulances flying out of the station. I'm like, 
something's going on, man. I see my lieutenant 
standing in the middle of the street just like -- 
just flagging all the ambulances to leave. He's 
in a real excited state. 

Q. Who was your supervisor? 

A. This was Lieutenant Melarango. 

So then my partner says, "Stop the 
car." So we stop the car in the middle of the 
street. He's like, "Something's going on." We 
jumped out of the car. We turned around, and we 
see the building on fire. We see the smoke 
coming out of the building and automatically 
assumed that we were bombed again, that another 
bomb went off in the World Trade Center, there 
was another attempt at trying to destroy the 
World Trade Center. 

We immediately jumped back into the 
vehicle, back into my car, and we get to the 
station. That's when we were informed that a 
plane hit. A plane had hit the World Trade 
Center. So we're in awe. I just jumped out of 
the car. I left the lights on. I didn't realize 
that until like two days later when I tried to 



J. BELL 5 

start it, but that's beside the point. 

I was already in uniform, and my 
partner wasn't. So right away the lieutenant was 
like, "Just get into a truck and get the fuck out 
of here." That's exactly what he said. 

I was already addressed, and my partner 
ran upstairs. He said, "Just meet me out there. 
Be safe." I was like, "I'll meet you out there. 
Be safe." So I jumped into a unit with another 
EMT, Garfield Grey. This is my first time really 
meeting him. We jumped into a unit together. I 
think it was unit 413. We immediately proceeded 
over to the site. We got there about three 
minutes later. 

Q. Do you know about what time this was? 

A. The scene was insane. 

I lost all track of time, to tell you 
the truth. 

Q. Okay. 

A. Once I saw that the building -- it was 

unreal, and I lost all track of time from there. 

We proceeded over to the site, and the 

scene was hectic. There were people running 

everywhere. There were units flying everywhere. 



J. BELL 6 

There was debris falling. It was just the 
worst -- it was the worst -- the horror on the 
people's faces, they were scattering, running all 
directions. 

At first we pulled the bus --we pulled 
the bus onto West Street about right in front 
of -- I'd say right in front of One World Trade 
Center on West Street, close to the corner of 
Vesey. We were just looking at the turn of 
events and we said, you know what, let's go over 
to the other side of the West Side Highway, just 
to be safe, because our first move is scene 
safety. 

So we crossed over to the other side of 
the West Side Highway, and we parked the bus at 
the corner of Vesey and West. 

Q. Can you just indicate on the map with a 
number 1 where you parked the vehicle? 

A. So we parked the unit there. We 
unloaded it. We threw everything we could onto 
the stretcher. I immediately ran to the corner. 
My partner said he was going to move the bus back 
even more to get the bus out of harm's way. At 
that point I didn't know where he had put the 



J. BELL 7 

bus. 

I immediately jumped into action. I 
started just rounding up people, because people 
were running with second degree, third degree 
burns, half their hair burned down to the scalp. 
People had broken arms. They were holding limbs. 
It was a bad scene. I saw a couple bodies 
falling out of the building. 

I just gathered myself within a split 
second, and I started gathering people to the 
corner. I had them all sit down, and I started 
triage tagging people. I was trying to listen to 
the radio, as I was doing all of this, to find 
out where a staging area could have been. I 
already had people -- I just started tagging 
people. I kind of lost track of time. 

My partner came back shortly after 
that. My partner came back. The bus wasn't too 
far away. It was like a hundred yards away from 
us. He just jumped into action too. He started 
tagging people and just trying to gather people 
towards us. 

Shortly after that nurses started 
arriving on the scene. I guess they had come out 



J. BELL 8 

of the building -- it looked like they were 
coming out of the World Financial Center. 
Anyway, there were nurses and other medical staff 
that were starting to arrive on the scene. Other 
units were starting to arrive. Everybody was 
trying to lend a hand. 

I figure about a half hour later after 
we arrived we had a good 20 to 30 people on that 
corner we were trying to treat. We were just 
trying to treat them. 

We then hear this explosion. We hear 
this explosion, and our first reaction is the 
plane was lodged in the building and it exploded 
or parts of it were still in the building and 
that exploded. 

Then people were screaming that another 
plane hit. I'm like, no way, there's no way. 
From where I was, I couldn't see the other tower. 
I saw the one tower. I couldn't see the other 
tower. They said another plane hit. So I'm 
like, there's no way. More people were starting 
to say it. Then it came over the radio. 

That's when I knew it was deliberate. 
I knew it was deliberate. At first I was 



J. BELL 9 

thinking maybe it was an accident, human error of 
the worst kind. But the second plane, I knew it 
was deliberate. I knew this was an attack. I 
wasn't even concentrating on that at the moment. 
I was just trying to gather the people. 

Then the scene became even more hectic. 
It became even more hectic. We were just trying 
to do what we can. Now there were news people on 
the scene, more units, more hands. It was 
becoming a more hectic scene. 

I'm not sure how much time passed after 
that. I lost track of time. You start to hear 
this rumble. You hear this rumble. Everything 
is shaking. Now I'm like, what the hell could 
that be. I'm thinking we're going to get bombed. 
This is an air raid. 

You hear this thunder, this rumbling. 
Then you see the building start to come down. 
Everybody's like, "Run for your lives! The 
building is coming down!" 

At that moment when that building was 
coming down, I was strapping a patient onto a 
stair chair. The thing about it was the patient 
was stable, but she was in a bit of hysteria. I 



J. BELL 10 

couldn't blame her. It was a female. She was 
very nervous. 

So I had her sit in the chair and I put 
some oxygen on her, because she wasn't breathing 
right, she was hyperventilating. I was just 
trying to calm her down. I was strapping her 
onto the stair chair, and that's when the 
building comes down. So I strapped her on. 

As I this tidal wave, it's like a tidal 
wave of soot and ash coming in my direction, my 
life flashed before my eyes. I made a L) turn, 
and I started to run -- I took about ten steps, 
and the lady started screaming, "Don't leave me! 
Don't leave me!" That's when I gathered myself. 
I got a hold of myself, wait, what the hell am I 
doing? 

I turned back around. I got her out of 
the chair. I said, "Ma'am, can you run?" She 
said, "Yes." She took off. I immediately made a 
L) turn, and I've never moved so fast in my life. 
I don't think my feet were touching the ground. 
My feet weren't touching the ground. 

Then shortly after that -- the building 
came down. It's like snow fall. The cars are 



J. BELL 11 

covered. The streets are covered. I'm covered 
and breathing in mouthfuls. You couldn't see. 
The scene was totally blacked out. You're just 
running in the direction that you think is away. 

I knew I was running -- this would be 
westbound. I was running westbound down Vesey. 
I ran about a block to North End Avenue. That's 
when the building -- you could hear the sound. 
The building came down. The building finished 
collapsing. 

So I immediately made a L) turn and just 
ran back, because I got separated from my 
partner. My partner Mike, who I rode with, I had 
bumped into him -- between all of that I bumped 
into him somewhere. When other units started 
arriving, he had finally arrived. 

So I immediately made a L) turn. I ran 
back. Now everybody's running back: firemen, 
policemen, EMTs, paramedics. Everybody's running 
back because we've got men in there, we had 
equipment in there, and the people. We were just 
running back. That was everybody's first -- not 
even hesitating, just made a L) turn and started 
heading back. 



J. BELL 12 

That's when over the radio you hear, 
"Stand fast. The north tower is leaning." I'm 
like, how is the north tower leaning? See, once 
I heard the second plane hit, I was thinking the 
second plane hit one building, both planes hit 
that one building, and that building had kind of 
come straight down. So all I saw was smoke 
coming at me and everything else, and I just ran. 
I still got bombarded with all of that stuff. 

When I came back this time, not only 
was it snowing but I could see the tower, and the 
tower was starting to break off. It was kind of 
looking like it was going to tip, and there was a 
piece of the building coming down right on top of 
me and Mike. We were holding each other's hands 
and we were like, "Whoa, look at that." 

We sat there like for a split second 
and we just watched it in amazement that this 
building was coming down, the second building was 
coming down. The building was hitting other 
buildings. It was hitting buildings over here. 
It was crazy. 

Then we made another L) turn, and 
everything started rumbling again. Another tidal 



J. BELL 13 

wave blacked out the whole scene. This time it 
was worse. We were just running. This time we 
ran all the way back as far as we could to the 
railing. I was damn near ready to jump in the 
river. I swear to God, I was holding the 
railing, looking back, as this thing's coming 
towards us. I was ready to jump in the water. 
We were all gathered there. 

The debris went well into the Hudson. 
It almost went to Jersey. There was debris 
almost to Jersey. It was over our heads. It was 
just blowing. There were papers -- the amount of 
paper, it was like a ticker tape parade. There 
were like a billion times more paper. We were 
swatting paper out of our face, on top of the 
soot and the ash and everything else. 

So then we stayed there. More people 
were coming. I started cutting up sheets. I had 
sheets. There was a stretcher like to the side. 
I started cutting up sheets and started making 
masks for everybody, because everybody's 
coughing, breathing in mouthfuls of shit. We 
were all covered from head to toe. I just 
started cutting up sheets and whatever. 



J. BELL 14 

Then we stayed in that one area. I 
think there was a fire chief in the area. He 
said to stand fast until further notice. We 
stood there. A boat was in the Hudson, and they 
called that boat in. It had beverages and 
reinforcements on the boat, water and everything. 
They pulled that boat in and docked it, and we 
unloaded it. 

As people were coming down Vesey, 
coming down to the scene, we were just handing 
out water, tagging them, treating them. 
Everybody wants to go back, but we're told we 
can't go back. Now we smell fumes. You smell 
gas in the air. You can damn near see fire. You 
could see fires blazing. 

That's when they say -- I don't know 
how much time passed since then. Now they're 
like, "Gather anything you can, anything you can 
retrieve, and head north to Chelsea Piers. 
That's where the staging is going to be." 

So I grabbed the stretcher, and I ran 
back about halfway between West and North End on 
Vesey, and I was trying to gather my equipment. 
All of my equipment was right there on that 



J. BELL 15 

corner. I didn't have anything. All I had on me 
was my helmet I was wearing and my turnout coat. 
My tech bag, all of my equipment was at that 
corner. I think the unit was at that corner, or 
my partner had got out -- the guy I was with, 
Garfield Grey, he was out of there. 

I was going to go back for the 
ambulance, but I was told not to, because there 
were ambulances on fire. There were fire trucks 
crushed. So I went about halfway. There was 
nothing there to gather. Then I came back up to 
North End. 

Inside the lobby of this building 
here -- I guess that's just an apartment 
building -- they had a lot of equipment in there. 
So we just gathered all of that equipment and 
loaded up the stretcher about a good six feet 
high and just walked that thing all the way up to 
Chelsea Piers. I walked behind along River 
Terrace back onto West Street and then up to 
Chelsea. 

We stayed up there a good -- I'd say a 
good five hours. By that time me and Mike had 
hooked back up. Now we were in unit 240. The 



J. BELL 16 

unit was totally stripped. We unloaded the unit. 
Now it was totally stripped. We were sitting up 
there waiting for the word, just waiting for the 
word when we could go back down. 

Now it's afternoon. Now it's like 
there's thousands of units. You see units 
rolling in from Baltimore, Philly, Jersey. 
Everybody was out there, just lining up along 
West Street on both sides of the street. I'm 
talking from about Chambers -- yeah, I would say 
from Chambers all the way up to like 28th Street 
you could see units lined up with no space in 
between, bumper to bumper, all the way up West 
Street. That's as far as I could see. I was 
about at -- that's like 23rd. I was at about 
20th, 20th and West Street. 

We noticed around like, I guess, 4:00, 
4 or 5:00 that we were running low on fuel, so we 
asked for permission to refuel at Battalion 8, at 
Bellevue Hospital. So we were given permission. 
We went that way -- 

Oh, wait, another major thing. When 
that second building came down, as we were 
running, you hear this thunder in the air. This 



J. BELL 17 

was a scary part. We hear thunder. That's when 
I'm like, oh, no, now they're going to bomb us. 
You hear this thunder. You know it's in the air, 
but you don't see anything. You just hear this 
loud sound. It's just getting bigger and bigger. 

Then you see our fighters in the air, 
F-14s, whatever they were, F-18s. Everybody just 
got a new sense of hope. We were all just 
cheering, like "USA" and "shoot those mother 
fuckers down." We knew we were at war. We knew 
we were at war. 

When the Feds arrived, like the Secret 
Service agent was near me, a couple Secret 
Service agents, and they were just telling us 
about the Pentagon. That's when we found out 
about the Pentagon and some of the other things 
transpired down there. Now that I think about 
it, there's a lot I forget. 

Basically we waited up there for the 
word to go back down. Once we got to Bellevue, 
the National Guard was already mobilized. They 
had check points along 23rd Street. Once we got 
to Bellevue, instead of heading back to -- since 
we knew the bus was stripped, we called Battalion 



J. BELL 18 

4, which is our station. We called from 
Battalion 8 to ask if they wanted us to reload 
the bus, restock the equipment. So we were told 
to restock the equipment at Battalion 4. 

So we drove down to our battalion, and 
we restocked the bus. Then we proceeded to the 
ferry, which was another staging area. They said 
any injuries that were north of the site would go 
to Chelsea; anything south would go to the ferry. 
Since we're more south from the site, we headed 
to the ferry after we stocked the bus, which was 
around I guess 6, 7:00. It was starting to get 
dark. 

They were like, all pass days are 
canceled. You're going to work 12-hour shifts or 
16-hour shifts or something like that. All pass 
days are canceled until further notice. 

So we went down to the ferry, and we 
just sat there and waited for a while for 
patients. Everybody was really anxious to go 
back. Nobody wanted to sit there. Nobody wanted 
to sit there like that. We were all getting 
frustrated, truthfully. 

A few firefighters came in. A few 



J. BELL 19 

firefighters with minor injuries came in. 
Between the ferry and Chelsea Piers, they had 
these units set up where they were ready to 
perform major surgery. They had surgery that was 
really impressive, the organization of the whole 
thing. 

It was really organized and really -- I 
mean, in the middle of a disaster, we were really 
prepared and we wanted to treat a lot of people, 
but unfortunately we kind of knew there wasn't 
going to be a lot of patients. We knew, but we 
were in denial. 

Then we sat at the ferry. Me and Mike, 
we stayed together. We stayed until about 4:00 
that morning, and then we were finally relieved. 
We were both pretty exhausted, so we drove home. 
I dropped him off at home. Did he stay? No, I 
dropped him off. We drove back to Staten Island 
together. I dropped him off at home. 

I finally went home, and the first 
thing I did was turn the television on. I was 
exhausted. I turned the TV, and I saw things 
happen -- I saw the replay of the planes hitting, 
and I couldn't believe what I was seeing. It did 



J. BELL 20 

not register. It didn't look real. It looked 
like toy planes. I'm like, that's what happened 
out there? That's what happened out there? 

I think I watched TV for about six 
hours straight. I didn't go to sleep until well 
into -- they told me to come back when I could on 
Thursday -- I mean on Wednesday, Wednesday day. 
I didn't get home until Wednesday morning. I 
watched TV until a good 12 or 1 in the afternoon. 
I slept about two hours, and then I came back to 
work. I stayed another 16. 

When I got home I think it was around 
Thursday night, and I woke up Friday morning and 
I fell apart. That's when I fell apart. It 
really hit me. I was in shambles. I was in bad 
shape. My wife was trying to console me. 

Once the buildings fell, cell phones 
were out. Everything was out. I didn't even get 
in contact with my family until I got to 
Battalion 8, which was that afternoon. Everybody 
was hysterical. My family was calling from all 
over the country. It was really -- it was 
insane. It was insane. 

I feel like a part of me is still out 



J. BELL 21 

there. A part of me is out there with the people 
(inaudible). The whole situation has really 
changed my life. It's humbled me. It's made me 
real humble that every day is not guaranteed, 
which I already knew but that even brought it 
more, just in the business that we do. 

But a situation like that, that was -- 
in my imagination I can't think of devastation to 
that magnitude. Just -- every day I come back to 
work it's like a nightmare that I can't wake up 
from. Every day I come back to work it's like, 
no, they did not take those buildings down, 
because I'm right downtown. The unit I work sits 
right downtown. 

Just as a kid I've always been amazed 
by those buildings. I was always amazed by those 
buildings. It's a part of our identity as New 
Yorkers. To see the skyline without those 
buildings, especially the first few weeks coming 
back to work with the smoke -- that smoke didn't 
stop for a good month and a half after -- it was 
totally unreal, totally unreal. 

My words don't even begin to touch the 
surface of what happened that day. I'm just 



J. BELL 22 

trying to put into some kind of perspective. My 
words don't even begin to touch the surface. 
That's about it. 

Q. Is there anything else you would like 
to add to this interview? 

A. I would just like to give my - - I don't 
know if it's proper, but I just want to -- all 
the guys that responded, fire, police, EMS, 
private, just everybody all across the country, 
it was a really heroic effort. 

Speaking for the guys at Battalion 4, 
we all -- I'm very appreciative that we're all 
accounted for. Some guys were missing for a 
little while, but for the most part we're all 
accounted for. That's more than we can say for a 
lot of guys. I just feel sorry for everybody 
that was out there. I dedicate my career, the 
rest of my career in the Fire Department to the 
people that died that day. 
That's about it. 

Q. Thank you very much for doing this 
interview with me. 

MR. ECCLESTON: The time is 1:31, and 

the counter reads 390. 



File No. 9110336 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
BARRETT HIRSCH 
Interview Date: December 17, 2001 



Transcribed by Maureen McCormick 



MR. CUNDARI: Today is December 17, 2001. 

The time is 719 hours. I'm George Cundari, New 

York City Fire Department, conducting an interview 

with the following individual. 

Q. Please state your name, rank, title and 
assign command. 

A. Barrett Hirsch, paramedic, New York City Fire 
Department, Battalion 58, Division 3. 

Q. Okay, Barrett, can you please tell us the 
events regarding is tragic day of September 11? 

A. Well, starting about roughly 10:15, 10:20, we 
received an assignment to respond to the Borough of 
Manhattan. Initially, our first response was not to 
where the World Trade Center was, but to an unconscious 
patient somewhere in the general vicinity. 

We responded from Brooklyn, and basically 
once winding up in the borough, we came across one of 
the local bridges. From the explosion back in '93, I 
knew that the towers would pretty much be an odd ball 
shot of getting there. Came across the Manhattan 
Bridge, and that's -- you can basically see pretty much 
both towers engulfed in flames. 

We shot down toward our assignment, which was 
just west of Broadway, and did a canvas of the area. 



Once we made contact with the Brooklyn dispatcher, we 
went to the tower, at which point the first tower 
collapsed, so when we finally got it to a staging area, 
one of the two that initially had been set up, they 
were worried about the integrity of the second tower, 
so we went into another area. 

Q. Did you witness the tower collapsing? 

A. The second tower. We were about -- 

Q. The first tower. Did you see it as you were 
approaching? 

A. To be honest, Bill may have seen it. I was 
busy driving the vehicle and trying not to hit the 
pedestrians that were around, because obviously there 
were a lot, a lot of traffic. 

So once we got to one of the first primary 
staging areas, at that time. We were directed just to 
get the vehicles out. They were trying to establish a 
secondary. 

Q. Were you seeing any patients at that time 
after the collapse? 

A. Not initially, not initially. I think most 
people were just trying to basically evacuate the 
area. It was basically a lot of the same stuff you saw 
back from --at least that I saw back in '93, a lot of 



little people with soft tissue stuff, but most people 
just trying to get out. 

Once we set up the second area, we started to 
get ourselves back down towards the second tower so we 
can assist in patient care. 

Q. Who was at that staging area? 

A. To be honest, I really -- I remember seeing 
some of our vehicles and one or two voluntaries, but 
not one particular officer was in charge, so I really 
couldn't give you the name as far as who was basically 
calling the shot. 

As we started to make our way up is when I 
happened to look up, and I saw a lot of people, you 
know, jumping out of the building. Then I noticed, 
like, the top of the tower seemed to shoot up a little 
bit and start to fall down a little bit, and that's 
when Bill Simon and I, who was my partner, just bolted 
in towards one of the other overpasses just to get some 
cover, and-- 

Q. So you ran north? 

A. We ran north up the Westside Highway, and 
just went into -- several police officers were 
shooting out doors so we could get in, just trying to 
secure a safe area for us as the second collapsed, at 



which point -- once some of the debris and the last big 
pillar of smoke, we were able to get out, just start 
working our way back up to towards what was left now of 
the second tower, and we just, like, left the vehicle 
where it was, and I don't even remember at that point. 
I think it was where the second one (inaudible). 
Somewhere near Murray, I believe, and we just started 
working our way back down towards the trade center. 

At that point, there was pretty much a lot of 
mass confusion at that point. It was just like 
everybody knew whatever resources had been in the 
immediate area were probably just wiped. I ran into 
one of my old S.O.D. lieutenants, Lieutenant Santiago. 
He and I immediately kind of like snapped into some of 
our old S.O.D. training. We started just, like, 
gathering units together, see if we can create like a 
secondary staging area. 

We saw a lot of little soft tissue stuff, a 
couple of respiratory distresses. We were finding some 
half crews. We did our best to, like, put them 
together and see if we could coordinate getting the 
most critical moved up to Chelsea where we heard -- 
whatever they -- I guess they made that their primary 
staging and just whatever we could find, just trying to 



get crews together and start taking care of the 
patients . 

And that's basically how that -- that part of 
the event went -- seemed like several hours, but I know 
it was only several minutes. Bill and I at that point 
had separated, Bill Simon and I had separated. Bill 
hooked up with -- I don't know his name. He was one of 
the lieutenants from Manhattan. He was from Bellevue. 
He went up to Chelsea Pier with the vehicle, and Jerry 
Lieutenant Santiago, tried to keep it in the Haz-Mat 
realm. 

Q. Basically, so really not many patients after 
the collapse? 

A. No, not really. Not like back in '93. I 
mean '83. '93. 

Then once all the bosses started to get over 
their primary shock, they started to get the sector 
commands back, established again, including the Fire 
Department, we had a small -- they were actually 
gathering some of the old Haz-Mat teams together and 
some of the old USAR teams. Was all part of S.O.D. at 
that time. The whole area was -- they were deciding 
whether or not we were going to suit up, or how and 
when USAR was going to get activated. 



Q. Where were you exactly when the tower 
collapsed? 

A. Second tower? 
Q. North tower collapsed. 

A. North tower collapsed. North tower, I was 
probably somewhere between -- probably between either 
Murray and Barclay, or Barclay and Vesey. 
Q. On West Street? 
A. On West, yeah. 

Q. You guys just ran up? You didn't go into a 
building anywhere there? 
A. Trying to go up? 

You ran north when you -- 

Oh, you mean after the tower collapsed? 

When it started collapsing. 

Yeah, we just ran north probably more towards 



Q 

A 

Q 

A 
Barclay. 

Q. Did you go into a building there? 

A. Yes. Probably down a little bit further when 
we stopped running was on the other side of Warren 
Street where the school is. We ducked into the -- 
there's an overpass from one school over to the other, 
and we ducked into the school. 

Basically after that it was just --at that 



point they started bringing us into one of the other 
secondary schools, and they started putting medics with 
EMTs and going down to the pile to see if they could 
find anything. I did that for the next day or so. 

Q. A long time. 

A. Yeah, it was a long day. 

Q. How was your radio communications? 

A. Well, to be honest, other than 
point-to-point, as far as, like, trying to hear some 
of, like, either Brooklyn central or Manhattan, it was 
very scratchy, pretty much unreadable. 

What little I did hear was mostly on the -- 
Bill and I, we were staying point-to-point, we were on 
the local TAC frequency, so that that kept us -- at 
least he knew what I was doing, and I knew what he was 
doing to make sure we were safe. So that went -- like 
because I knew, like, the lower Manhattan frequency was 
just trash. They didn't need to know where we were 
going through or any other nonsense. 

You could hear -- every once in awhile I 
switched over to citywide to see if anything was 
going. When I had run into Dr. Gonzalez, he basically 
wanted to know -- once again, it goes back to the old 
SOD days. He was, like, oh, what do we have here, 



here, here and here. I'm like, this isn't the old SOD 
days. I don't have any details for you like I used to 
be able to get . 

Q. Right. 

A. And it was very -- that was very -- that was 
very annoying to me personally. 

Q. Because you didn't have the equipment? 

A. I didn't have the equipment. I didn't have 
the resources, and I didn't have the additional -- just 
basically additional information to be able to play 
with, some of the tools that I had earlier. That kind 
of made me feel pretty much worthless. I just didn't 
like that at all. 

Q. So when you arrived, they were talking about 
a secondary collapse? 

A. They were already concerned about the -- 

Q. So they were moving things around? 

A. Like that, they were trying to get things 
reorganized after the first blast they -- I know they 
started some of the crews and somebody over in the 
other tower and -- 

Q. Who was talking about that? 

A. It was just (inaudible) around the area. I 
couldn't be specific as to what particular boss 



10 



mentioned it or -- 

Q. Fire chiefs were there? 

A. Everybody was there. Everybody was squared 
off at that point, because they already knew they lost 
one building. It's only a matter of time -- the second 
is less than 2Q0 feet away, so yeah, everybody was 
pretty much concerned. 

Fire was pulling back. We were pulling 
back. P.D. was screaming get their guys out. 
Everybody was -- everybody was just trying to get the 
fuck out at that point. Trying to -- you saw a lot of 
people taking people with them. Nobody was like -- I 
mean, they tried to make this about as organized as 
that could be, but -- 

MR. CUNDARI : Thank you for conducting this 

interview. The time is 7:31. This concludes the 

interview. 



File No. 9110350 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EVELYN VEGA 
Interview Date: December 18, 2001 



Transcribed by Maureen McCormick 



MS. BASTEDENBECK: The time now is 1710 
hours. My name is Christine Bastedenbeck. I work 
for the New York City Fire Department. I'm at 
Battalion 4 EMS command doing an interview 
regarding the date September 11, 2001, with the 
following individual. 

Q. Please state your name, your rank, your 
shield number and the area you work. 

A. Hi. My name is EMT EVELYN VEGA. My shield 
number is 5752. I'm currently assigned to Battalion 
04, Station 11. 

Q. Ms. Vega, you were working on the morning of 
September 11, 2001? 

A. Yes, I was. I was. 

Q. Can you just tell me about the events that 
morning? 

A. Yes. Okay. My tour began at 0900 to 1700 
hours, and I was on duty. I came in, my normal 
routine, to work, and I went to the locker room, and 
came out, got ready, whatever, and my partner that 
morning was EMT Torres. When I came down, he was -- 
actually, he already had vehicle keys. That was 
vehicle 404. He was inspecting the vehicle. 

It was about a quarter to 9 a.m. I bumped 



EVELYN VEGA 

into one of my coworkers. His name is EMT Bell. He 
starts also at 0900, and by the way, that morning, I 
was 01 boy. So I bumped into Bell, and he told me, 
"Oh, did you hear that a plane hit the World Trade 
Center?" I said, "No, no, I don't believe you. What 
are you talking about?" He said, "Come, come, I'll 
show you. You can see it from here." 

So I followed him. We weren't able to see 
anything. So I just wasn't sure. I just went in for 
roll call, and I went inside, kind of ran inside to the 
office, and Lieutenant Melaragno was there, and he 
was -- he just threw the keys, the radios. He was just 
get out of here, get out of here, so now it was kind of 
confirmed, although I wasn't, you know, a hundred 
percent sure, but he was, like, get out of here. A 
plane hit the World Trade Center. 

So I just took some keys, and I gave them 
back because my partner already had the stuff he needed 
so I just hopped -- jumped into the driver's side, and 
we just head out. We weren't dispatched by a 
dispatcher. We just were sent out by the lieutenant, 
and we just drove towards the World Trade Center. 

As I'm getting closer, I see a big hole at -- 
I guess it was Tower 1, World Trade Center 1, the north 



EVELYN VEGA 

tower . 

Q. The first building that was struck? 
A. Uh-huh, the first building. 

Then by this time, I think it was like five 
minutes to 9 a.m., and we're driving, and then we 
are -- I remember being on Barclay. We're driving. I 
told my partner, "Should I make a left here onto 
Broadway?" He says, "No, continue west." I said, 
"Fine." Do I turn on Church? He's like no. We 
looked. He said, "No, too much commotion." 

We went straight, still continued west. We 
got to West Street. I said, "Do I make a left here?" 
He said, "Yeah, make a left here, " and so I made a 
left, and I pulled over at Vesey and West Street facing 
south on the east side of the street on West Street. 

We jump out of the vehicle. We put on our 
safety jacket, our helmet, and we take out all 
equipment, stretcher, whatever, everything, and we 
start heading towards the building. 

Now, we bumped into a chief, fire chief. I 
don't know his name. I don't recall anything. I 
just -- he was flagging us to come towards him, and so 
we went towards him, and then when I assumed -- at the 
time I didn't know -- but now I know that the second 



EVELYN VEGA 

plane had hit, and we looked up. We heard it. The 
debris started falling. People started jumping off the 
building, whatever. 

So he was, like, clear the way, move your 
vehicle a little north. So we moved like a few feet 
north, and I believe it was still on Vesey and West, 
but on the north side of -- north corner, versus the 
south corner where we were, and I moved, and I went 
back towards the buildings. 

I had a few people that worked in the 
building calling us that there was people in the 
basement, and they needed help. So we're debating 
should we go in or not. We decided to go in. 

We went into one World Trade Center. We went 
inside. We went -- the elevator wasn't working. It 
was on two sublevels down. We went down. We left the 
stretcher in the lobby, and we went down. There was 
two patients. It was like 15 other workers. They were 
doing construction work down there. 

The patients were one female, one male, and 
one had a back injury, and one had a knee or a leg 
injury, fracture or whatever. We only had one back 
board. We improvised. We cared for these patients, 
and then we rushed them out. 



EVELYN VEGA 

We used the exit through the underground 
garage that workers there assisted us with, so we got 
out of there. Before we left, one patient was taken by 
the workers to help us. They took the female patient, 
and my partner went to make alignment for -- to let 
them know that where we were, because, of course, we 
were dispatched not by them, but by our lieutenant, so 
nobody really knew where we were. So he did that. 

Supposedly he got in contact with central, 
whatever the case may be. He came back, and we took 
the second patient out, and we got out. When we got 
out, there were ambulances in the area, so they took 
the patients, and we just went to our -- we left with 

-- you know, we gave the patient to the other unit and 
we became -- we started walking now. 

When we exited, we were on Vesey and West in 
the middle of the block between Church, between West 
Broadway and West Street on Vesey, so we just started 
walking together towards the ambulance. When we got 
into the ambulance, we put our equipment and whatever, 
and we found out at that time that they were staging at 
Vesey between West Street and North End, so I angle 
parked the ambulance. 

My partner went to speak to the chief in 



EVELYN VEGA 

command or whoever the operating lieutenant that was, 
you know, responsible for the triage of the commanding 
area. So I stood there, and I was trying to use my 
cell phone, and I didn't get a reception. 

At this time, I didn't know we were hit by a 
second plane. I just heard on 1010 WINS that the 
Pentagon was hit, and I was, like, okay, you know, 
whatever, and I just stepped out of the vehicle, and I 
stood behind my ambulance, and I saw a cop there trying 
to use the phone. So I started talking to him, and he 
said, "Well, I can't get through." I said, "Me 
neither," whatever. 

So moments after, maybe five minutes or so, I 
hear a rumble, and I just look towards the east side of 
the street. I'm in the middle of the block on Vesey 
between West and North End, so now I turn, and I look 
east towards the corner of West and Vesey, and I see 
people in blue uniforms, cops, whoever they were. They 
were running towards my way, so I didn't know what to 
do, so I looked the opposite direction, and I see other 
people running the same direction. 

So I just started running. So I started 
running by myself because my partner was taking care of 
something else, so I just ran, left the vehicle there, 



EVELYN VEGA 

and just kept running north. Running, running north, 
and still at this time I didn't know that the second 
plane was hit, and when we heard that rumble, that 
noise, I didn't know that that was when the first tower 
fell until I met up with another coworker. His name is 
EMT Orlando Martinez. We stood together for the whole 
way. 

There was no one else from Battalion 4. We 
just kept running north. We kept stopping. I was 
trying to raise my partner over the radio, and all I 
kept hearing was Mayday, Mayday. We had no idea where 
his partner or my partner were, so we were worried, and 
no one else from our battalion was there. So it was 
out of control. 

As we were running north, and we were looking 
south, we saw the smoke and everything, and then we 
heard, you know, that the building had fell, whatever, 
so we finally got, I guess, to -- it was West Street 
and closer to Chambers, and we just stood there, and 
trying to find out, you know, permission, trying to use 
someone's phone. The restaurants were open. People 
giving water at a local bar. So we got water, and I 
was trying to use the phone, but there were lines, so I 
didn't use the phone. And then we find -- we hear the 



EVELYN VEGA 

second building fell. 

So now we keep running north, because they 
kept saying just run north. So everybody was just 
running, civilians, police officers, some ambulance. 
We hopped in some ambulance. We just went north, 
dropped everything. Everybody was just -- it was a 
commotion going north. 

Now you have to go to Chelsea Piers. You 
have to go to Chelsea Piers. So we didn't go to 
Chelsea Piers yet. We were still going north, and we 
stopped, and then they said there was a gas leak. 
Something in the air. We got to get out of the area. 
Some pollution or whatever. So now the guy that I was 
with, Orlando Martinez, he bumped into his partner, so 
beautiful, I found out that my partner was looking for 
me, but no sight of him. 

So now there was like a few -- like five guys 
from Battalion 4, so we were feeling better about, you 
know, everybody being okay. So we started running, and 
then when they announced there was, like, a gas leak, I 
mean, this is all I heard, you know, people -- just 
rumors running around with information, and, of course, 
everywhere we stopped there was like a lieutenant, EMT 
lieutenant, or a Fire Department lieutenant, or 



10 

EVELYN VEGA 



whoever. There was always a boss, someone telling us 
what to do, where to go. 

So finally, we jumped into -- the last thing 
was like that gas leak thing, and I opened the back 
doors of the ambulance, and like 15 million people. 
They were all EMTs, cops, transit, whatever. They ran 
inside of the back of the ambulance, and we just kept 
going to Chelsea Piers. They told us where to park, 
and we just staged there. 

We stood there, and I was able -- that's when 
Chelsea Piers was open. They were helping us, giving 
us water. They let us use the phone, and I contacted 
my family. I guess this was all by eleven o'clock, 
because the second building, I think, fell like 10:30, 
so this whole thing by 11, I figure. 

I contacted my family, and then finally 
before twelve I reunited with my partner, and then 
there was another EMT. Her name is EMT Perrin. I 
don't know her last name, but she belongs to Battalion 
4, and she had just finished coming off duty, Tour 1, 
so she came in, and she was doing inventory of all the 
Battalion personnel, you know, who was missing or 
whatever. So it was a good thing that, you know, she 
had a list that we could ask, did you speak to this 



11 

EVELYN VEGA 



one, did you bump into this one, did you have the 
possibility of this one, whatever. 

So at this point, like, it was a whole bunch 
of us from Battalion 4. It was maybe a few people 
missing we were worried about, but for the most part, 
everybody was okay. 

Then, like, three p.m. we were relieved from 
the scene, and we went back to the 911 system. 

Q. At what point did you pick up your vehicle 
and bring it uptown with you? 

A. I never did. My partner apparently -- I 
bumped into him by twelve, I'm assuming, and he had the 
vehicle, so he picked it up, because after the whole 
story, I mean, after this whole thing, I found out that 
instead of him -- most of them running north, they ran 
west towards the water, so everybody was hanging out 
there by the water. That's why we didn't hear any more 
from our battalion because that's where everybody was, 
but me and Martinez, we were going north because, I 
mean, that's the only way. 

I didn't even think about going through the 
park out to the water. I just went north, so he picked 
up the vehicle with whoever else. We had all the 
ambulances there. That's where they were staging. 



12 
EVELYN VEGA 



So that's basically the adventure. 

Q. Anything else you'd like to add to what you 
told me so far? 

A. No. 

Q. That pretty much covers the day? 

A. Yes. Of course, that I had to work two 
shifts, which is expected, 16 hours, and after we were 
relieved, and we went to the 911 system, it was like 
torture. We were getting calls with people having 
headaches and just stomach pains, and it was just too 
much for me to handle. I mean, just knowing what we 
just went through, and how we are needed for other 
things, and we have people actually dialing 911 for a 
headache. I was really bothered by that. 

A lot of our calls were on North End Street 
and South End Street, which is right across from the 
World Trade Center, and both buildings, of course, had 
no light and no electricity, no elevators. Nothing was 
happening. 

So we were receiving calls, and we were being 
dispatched to those buildings where we had to climb 30, 
40 floors to get there with flashlights and all the 
equipment, so that was mind-boggling, because every 
time we got to these high-rises, there was no patient, 



13 
EVELYN VEGA 



no one was there. 

I mean, everybody was evacuated, but I guess 
it's part of our job, but it was just -- yeah, it was 
not a good thing, you know, and then to get there, we 
had to park our ambulance, like, far away from, and 
then we'd have to carry everything and go through all 
the rubble. 

I bumped into firefighters that were taking 
out firefighters that were dead, you know, so it was 
just crazy. It was crazy, but that was it basically. 

MS. BASTEDENBECK: Thank you very much for 
your time. The time now is 1725 hours. Thank you 
very much. 

MS. VEGA: Thank you. 

MS. BASTEDENBECK: This concludes our 
interview. 



File No. 9110351 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
Captain David Fenton 
Interview Date: December 18, 2001 



Transcribed by Elizabeth F. Santamaria 



2 
Fenton 
MURRAY MURAD: The time is now 1300 

hours and I'm Murray Murad of the Fire 

Department of the City of New York. I am 

conducting an interview with -- 

A. Captain David Fenton, New York City Fire 
Department, EMS Command, assigned to Division 6. 

Q. This interview is being conducted at the 
Fire Department headquarters at the Bureau of 
Investigations and Trials, and this is regarding the 
events of September 11, 2001. 

Captain Fenton, can you tell us in 
your own words what happened that day? 

A. Okay. I normally worked tour 3 as a duty 
captain in the South Bronx. I was home in bed. 
Nice place to be. My wife called me and said, "You 
better turn on the TV. Something is up. I think 
you have to go to work." So I turned on the TV and 
that was right after the first tower got hit. I 
called in. They said, "Yep, come on in." And they 
were going to leave a Suburban for me. I drove to 
Jacobi, got in the Suburban. As I was driving over 
the Throgsneck Bridge as I was -- in reference with 
time, on the way in, at about 9:55, when the south 
tower collapsed. 



Fenton 
I got to Jacobi just as the north tower 

collapsed at about 10:29. It was myself, four EMT's 

who I don't have a clue who they were that Jacobi 

put in my Suburban. I know they track their names 

and stuff at Jacobi. And a paramedic by the name of 

Ed Bradley, we all jumped in the Suburban and down 

to the Trade Center we went. We were heading 

down -- we were told by Citywide to respond to 

Chambers and West and we were southbound on Chambers 

at about the meat packing district, at about Little 

West 12th Street, when they were in the process of 

doing the rapid evacuation for the gas main. 

I saw everybody coming back at us. We turned 
around. Most of the units were stopping there. I 
knew that there was a prestaging area set up at the 
Chelsea Piers. So as the units were stopping there, 
I instructed all those units to continue on up to 
the Chelsea Piers to the prestaging area where they 
can be turned around and redeployed as needed. 

After making sure that all the units went up to 
Chelsea, where I took my suburban and my five 
people, we turned around and went back up to 
Chelsea. I was there and I saw Chief Kowalczyk and 
a few other people organizing the staging area. 



4 
Fenton 
They told me to just turn around and go right back 

down again. So I responded down West Street parking 

probably just north of Warren Street and we were 

parked southbound in the northbound lanes. We got 

out and we walked out to the command post that was 

established at Chambers and West. At that point the 

five personnel who were with me were directed into 

Stuyvesant High School to a personnel staging area 

and I was directed to remain at the command post and 

await orders. 

A short time after that I was instructed by 

Chief Carrasquillo to report in to the Stuyvesant 

High School and ensure that the personnel who are in 

there were getting formed into teams for deployment, 

if needed. There were approximately five 

lieutenants there and about 30 EMT's and medics 

combined. I know Lieutenant Horan was there and he 

was the one I tasked with taking attendance and 

forming everybody up into teams. So there would be 

at least five EMT's, one medic and one lieutenant 

per team. Also about that time there was a decision 

made that the lobby of the building would be used to 

treat any walk-in wounded. They set it up as a 

treatment area, which a wide variety of doctors, 



5 
Fenton 
nurses and everybody else arrived with medical 

supplies. I don't know where they came from or who 

they were. They set up a medical clinic there. We 

assigned some of our people to assist in that area. 

Most of the stuff they were doing were eye 
washes. One thing that struck me as amazing was I 
didn't see any stretcher cases. Nobody came in on a 
backboard or a stretcher. Everybody was ambulatory. 
Then later on, about twelve-ish or so, 12:30, I went 
with Chief Carrasquillo and we did have a 
reconnoiter of the area. And what we were looking 
for was a place to place for the tents to be set up 
coming from the Parks Department to become the true 
treatment area on the Riverside with Medivac access. 
We found an area. We worked it out with a Police 
Officer, I believe, or maybe even a sergeant from 
ESU by the name of Techie who would -- where the 
cops would be landing their helicopters, where we 
would be landing the Medivac helicopters. And that 
never actually came to fruition. We didn't use it. 

Going back inside, by that time Lieutenant 
Fuchs from the academy -- Kath Fuchs was there from 
the academy and she started taking care of 
organizing the inside of the house as the treatment 



6 
Fenton 
area. At which point I was redeployed by Chief 

Carrasquillo back out to the command post and I 

assisted in doing a variety of small tasks and 

directing a few people there. 

Q. Where was the command post again? 

A. The command post was at the intersection 
of Chambers and West, underneath an overpass. 
Deputy Assistant Chief Butler was there, Chief 
Carrasquillo was there and Chief Martin was there, 
that I saw. Other people coming in and out, but 
they were the ones that were assigned there. 
Originally I was assigned as the Fire Department 
liaison to the forward Fire Chiefs and I went down 
toward Ground Zero at that point, shadowing a chief. 
Did what we had to do. They then established -- a 
forward command post was set up at Vesey and West, 
which is where I spent a good part of the time after 
that for the rest of the day just funneling the 
information to the Chiefs, fire side and requests 
back out to our command post at Chambers and West. 

Eventually I was relieved and I was sent back 
to the command post where I was given a set of keys 
and some paper and a pen and my new job was to go 
down to Ground Zero and record all the ambulances 



7 
Fenton 
that were destroyed and get the doors popped and 

make sure that none of our people were still in 

them. I went down to one of the fire vehicles, got 

a Halligan and I proceeded down into the south side. 

First I started the north side. There weren't too 

many vehicles there. I recorded what was there. 

Most of them were open. Then I went around to the 

south side of Liberty where a large quantity of 

ambulances were there. None really of ours. Mostly 

the 911 participants. And I proceeded with a couple 

of firefighters. We popped a few rear doors, popped 

a few cabs that we couldn't see into. I made an 

account of all the vehicles that were there. We 

didn't find anybody either under them or in them. I 

went around and did the same thing on the Church 

Street side to the vehicles I could get to. There 

were some vehicles that were underneath number 7 

when it came down that we just couldn't get to, 

because the rubble pile was shifting and most of it 

was still on fire. 

The list of equipment in the vehicles were then 

given back to the command post at Chambers and West 

and they called in representatives from the other 

911 participants, to give them their vehicles at 



8 
Fenton 
that were in there. So that way they could start 

doing a vehicle accounting. 

Q. How many vehicles did you estimate or did 
you observe or count? 

A. Approximately 15 to 20. 

Q. And those were all EMS? Fire Department? 

A. No. Those were ambulances. Actually, the 
majority of them were 911 participants and not 
municipal ambulances. 

Q. So you are referring to like Metrocare? 

A. Metrocare, New York Hospital, Beekman 
Downtown. 

Q. So roughly between fifteen and twenty 
ambulances? 

A. Fifteen and twenty ambulances that I 
physically entered. 

Q. Is there anything else that you would like 
to add? 

A. No. And then the rest of the night I 
functioned pretty much as a site safety officer with 
several other former SOD members. Charlie Fraser, 
Jimmy Scullion, Steve Linke, Kevin Haugh, Jeff Race. 
MURRAY MURAD: All right. I would like 

to thank you, Captain Fenton, for the 



9 
Fenton 
interview. The time now is 1312 hours. This 

now concludes the interview. Thank you. 



File No. 9110367 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
JASON KATZ 
Interview Date: December 20, 2001 



Transcribed by Maureen McCormick 



MR. ECCLESTON: Today's date is December 20, 

2001. My name is Christopher Eccleston of the New 

York City Fire Department, World Trade Center Task 

Force. I am conducting an interview with the 

following individual. 

Q. Please state your name, rank, shield number 
and assigned command. 

A. My name is Jason Katz. My shield is 2101, 
and I am currently an EMT chief's aide at Division 4. 

Q. Jason, were you assigned to the World Trade 
Center disaster on 9/11? 

A. Yes. 

Q. In your own words, can you tell me about the 
details of that day? 

A. The day started out -- I reported to work at 
the division office, as I normally do, and I was here 
for maybe ten minutes when I was told that the two 
planes crashed into the twin towers, and that Chief 
Carrasquillo was on his way here, and he was picking up 
personnel to go. 

From that time, Chief Carrasquillo arrived. 
We jumped into the car with him. We grabbed our 
helmets and turnout coats, and we responded in, and I 
guess about -- being on the LIE probably by the Pulaksi 



JASON KATZ 

Skyway, we got the report that the second plane crashed 
into the second tower, the north tower. 

Q. When you say "we," can you just tell me who 
the other people with you were? 

A. I was in the car with Chief Carrasquillo, 
Captain Rivera and Chief Carrasquillo ' s aide, Sal 
Sangeniti. 

At that time, we came out of the tunnel into 
Manhattan and shot down the FDR around to the Westside 
Highway and parked our car roughly around Westside 
Highway and Carlyle Street. 

Q. Can you just indicate on the map provided 
approximately where you parked your vehicle? 

A. I would say between Carlyle and Rector. 
That's about the best I remember. Between Carlyle and 
Rector . 

Q. Can you just mark it with the No. 1? Thank 
you. 

A. At that time, we got out of the car, and 
Chief Carrasquillo told me to meet up with Chief Brown, 
who had just arrived a little bit before us, and he was 
a few cars ahead of us, and to go team up with him and 
become his aide for the day. 

When I went to go meet Chief Brown, there 



JASON KATZ 

were a few bodies laying in the street -- and I just 
met up with Chief Brown. We reported in to 
operations. Operations told us to set up staging and 
triage, more staging at West and Liberty, and on the 
way back to West and Liberty, there was debris flying 
down, and it was pretty scary. There was a bunch of 
pieces of metal or debris just coming down, and I think 
there were bodies. I wasn't even sure. We just kept 
moving, kept running over to set up the staging area on 
West and Liberty. 

Chief Brown directed me at that time to just 
track what units were where, and, you know, who was 
who, and a lot of voluntary and private ambulances on 
the scene. Just try to get the number and names of the 
crews, and at that time I was doing that, and then we 
started to hear a roar, and I looked back. 

Everybody was running, so I just kind of 
started running with them, and the next thing I know, I 
just remember jumping on a staircase and putting my 
hands over my helmet, and, you know praying to God, and 
then it all went black. It was silent. You couldn't 
hear a thing. 

I remember something hit my hand. I don't 
know what it was. I got up after all this. It seemed 



JASON KATZ 

like it was forever, but it was probably just a few 
minutes. It was -- I remember seeing a fire truck. I 
think it was on fire. I remember just trying to work 
my way over there. 

I heard people screaming and yelling and 
just, you know, all disarray. So I made it over to the 
fire truck looking for a Scott pack, and kind of hung 
out in this fire truck. I don't even know what company 
it was. I think it was a tower ladder, and things 
lifted a little bit. 

Q. Do you know what that location was? 
A. It was just south of the south crossover. It 
was just south of there, and things started to lift, 
and then I heard Bobby Brown's voice just calling for 
me, and things began lifting a little more, and I made 
my way back over to him, and we just kind of started to 
looking under debris. 

Everything was lifting. It was kind of hard 
to breathe. We were covered head to toe, you know, 
with dust and everything, and we were just looking in 
the debris, listening for people screaming, seeing if 
we could find anybody. At that time, we ran into Chief 
Wells. We found a suburban, and we were looking 
through the suburban for a first-aid kit just to wrap 



JASON KATZ 

up my hand. Because at this time I noticed my hand was 
bleeding pretty good. I had cut two fingers on my left 
hand . 

After that, we were there for maybe 15, 20 
minutes just looking, you know, trying to regroup, see 
who was where, try and get in contact with the command 
post, if they were still alive. We didn't even know. 

At that point, we really weren't sure of what 
had happened. We just -- you know, and then we looked 
up, and we noticed the tower was gone. It seemed like 
it was just maybe 15, 20 minutes, and I just heard 
everyone saying, run again. 

So I went in through -- went in through one 
building that the south tower was attached to on the 
west side. I'm not sure what building it was. The 
lobby was all blown out. All the glass was blown out, 
so you could run right through the lobby, so once they 
started saying run, I just took off again, made it 
through the lobby, started running down -- I don't know 
what street it was. 

Q. West End Avenue? 

A. Yes, that's where it was, West End Avenue, 
and I jumped into a store, and I guess it's the Gateway 
Plaza here. I think it was a diner, or a coffee shop 



JASON KATZ 

or something like that. At that point, the second 
tower had come down, and when I was in that store, 
there was one civilian in there, who was hiding 
underneath the table, and she was pretty panicked. I 
calmed her down a little bit, and after things started 
to lift again, I escorted her over to a building on 
West End and Albany on the -- that would be the 
southeast corner. 

There were a whole bunch of firemen in there 
and civilians. I don't even know what they were, cops 
or firemen. Cops were wearing firemen helmets. 
Firemen were wearing just hard hats. You had no clue 
who was who, but we stayed in there for a little bit. 

They kind of pulled us over when things 
started to lift. We stayed in there for a few minutes, 
and then I came out of there, and once again just 
amazingly I ran into Chief Brown. I heard him 
screaming, you know, calling out. We met up with him, 
and we met up with Commissioner Gregory. I think he's 
communications. 
Q. Yes. 

A. He was there in a turnout coat, and a few 
firefighters, and a couple of, I think, Metro Care 
ambulance people had all gathered in the middle of the 



JASON KATZ 

street. Then we heard two planes coming overhead. We 
weren't sure, you know, if they were friendly or just 
loud jet engines, so we started making a little run to 
the west side. We noticed it was a F-16. 

We were ready to jump in the drink if we had 
to, and at that time a fire boat had met us over on the 
west side and we -- that ambulance bandaged my finger 
up on the west side there. Then we started helping 
civilians onto the fire boat. That was pretty much 
just civilians and people who were nurses were helping 
wash out our eyes and helping wash civilians' eyes and 
just helping everybody off the island at that point. 

Then from there we started making our way 
down to the Battery City, and something about a report 
of a gas leak, that they were evacuating the island, 
and it was kind of a mad rush, and everyone was jumping 
on police boats that were in the basin, the boat basin 
down there. 

We all jumped on the police boats -- myself, 
Bobby Brown and a couple of other EMTs -- and we jumped 
on the boat. They shot us over to Jersey. After we 
helped everybody off, we went back, and at that time we 
made our way down to Liberty -- Battery Park by the 
Liberty ferry terminal. 



JASON KATZ 

Q. Okay. 

A. That's where we met up with Chief Steffens. 
That was pretty much where things calmed down. We were 
there for about, I guess, an hour, just cleaning up, 
drinking some water. 

At that point, I made my way down. Chief 
Brown stayed there, and I made my way down to the 
Staten Island Ferry Terminal and the triage. They 
cleaned me up a little bit and sent me on the Staten 
Island ferry to a triage area at the Staten Island 
Ferry Terminal in Staten Island. I jumped on a bus, 
and they took me to Staten Island University Hospital. 

Q. You said you had the injuries to your hand. 
What kind of injuries did you have? 

A. There were degloving injuries, and I 
fractured the tips on my pointer and middle finger on 
my left hand . 

Q. Do you know what you injured it on? 

A. Just flying debris. 

Q. Just flying debris. 

A. What I forgot to mention was I remember when 
we were first there, Chief Brown told us to put on our 
chin straps, which is something most of the time we 
don't wear. That probably saved my life because I 



10 

JASON KATZ 



would have lost my helmet when the debris was coming 
down. 

Q. It's not something we commonly use, right. 
Is anything else you'd like to add to this interview? 
A. No. 

MR. ECCLESTON: This interview is being 
concluded at 1447. 

I thank you very much for conducting this 
interview. The tape is 181. 



File No. 9110368 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
ROBERT KIMBALL 
Interview Date: December 20, 2001 



Transcribed by Maureen McCormick 



MS. BASTEDENBECK: Today is December 20, the 

year 2001. My name is Christine Bastedenbeck. 

I'm at Division 4, EMS command, conducting an 

interview regarding September 11 with the 

following individual. 

MR. KIMBALL: My name is Robert Kimball. 

EMT, currently serve as a chief's aide. 

Q. Bobby, were you working on the morning of 
September 11? 

A. I was off. However, at 8:45, I heard the 
incident happened. I called the Division 4 office, 
asked them what the plan was and what we had planned to 
do. She advised me that she -- I'm sorry, Lieutenant 
Guarneri advised me she really didn't have a plan yet. 
So I asked if the spare vehicle 913, the van, was 
available, and if it was, that we should load it up 
with spare equipment, and I would be in within 15 
minutes to pick it up and transport it down to LSI) and 
MERV 4. 

I made it here approximately nine o'clock, 
and at that time the van was loaded, and there was a 
lieutenant. I don't remember his name. I really 
didn't know him, and an EMT from downstairs, pretty 
much a new guy. 



ROBERT KIMBALL 

Q. When you say downstairs -- 

A. Downstairs at Battalion 50. We went into the 
vehicle. It was loaded up, and we made our way down 
into Manhattan. 

At approximately -- we left here at 9:15. I 
made it down into Manhattan approximately ten o'clock. 
We were initially going to the west side, because we 
were told that's where MERV 4 and LSI) 4 were staged, 
but we were unable to get over onto that side of the 
World Trade Center. 

They redirected us at about 10:10 and told us 
to go down to the Staten Island Ferry Terminal, because 
they wanted to set up a triage, treatment, transport 
area down there. So we went down to that area, went up 
to the 2nd Floor of the ramp for the Staten Island 
Ferry Terminal, and we set up a treatment transport 
area over there. 

At that moment in time, I had no chief to 
work with, so Chief Villani said, "Okay, Bob, you're 
with me today." We did some initial stuff at the 
Battery Park ferry terminal, and then we had a gator, 
and we were pretty much just traveling all over the 
World Trade Center site. 

We went to One Liberty Plaza to check on the 



ROBERT KIMBALL 

units that we had over there, because we had staged 
over there approximately 20 ambulances at one point. 
There was a treatment center. We were asked to go over 
there initially because of the question of the 
building's sturdiness, and that all turned out to be 
fine at that particular moment. 

We went back down to the EMS command post, I 
guess. I'm not exactly sure where exactly that was. 
Everything just looked very different from what it 
looked like at that point. Met with I believe it was 
Chief Carrasquillo that particular moment in time, see 
what he wanted to do, where he wanted us at, so we were 
just basically going back and forth from the ferry 
terminal to the World Trade Center site looking at 
units, you know, seeing who needed what, going back to 
the ferry terminal to see, you know, how we're doing 
there. 

I guess approximately three o'clock-ish 
sometime, that was about the next time I remember, I 
saw deputy chief Bobby Brown come in with some eye 
irritation and his aide Jason Katz with -- his hand had 
some lacerations on it, I believe. That was pretty 
much about the last time that I remember any kind of, 
like, time sequence, because I basically just stayed 



ROBERT KIMBALL 

the whole day at the -- between the ferry terminal and 
One Liberty Plaza. 

I believe we went down to Liberty and West at 
one particular moment in time, and I believe we did 
make it over to Vesey and West at another particular 
time. I believe the command post was somewhere along 
here. Was it Murray and West that particular night? 
But that was earlier. We had no real protection as far 
as masks went. 

Q. Where were you when the buildings collapsed? 

A. We were traveling down -- I believe the first 
building collapsed, and we were traveling down 
Broadway. I think it collapsed, what, 9:05 or 
something? No, I'm sorry 10:05. 9:55. 

So we were traveling down Broadway, and 
that's when we were redirected at about 10:10 down to 
the ferry terminal. 

Q. Where were you when the second building 
collapsed? 

A. When the second building collapsed, I 
believe -- let's see. What time did that collapse? 
Because I think I was still -- 10:29. I was just -- I 
guess we were right about here. I don't know what 
street this is. 



ROBERT KIMBALL 

Q. So you were south of Rector? 

A. Yes, I was about, I guess, one, two blocks 
south of Rector. We had a whole bunch of ambulances 
standing here, more like Hunter and Metro Care, I guess 
it was, and we were trying to get them down more 
towards our area so we could stage them up properly. 

So when the second building came down, that's 
where we were, right about here, but I guess by then we 
set up a treatment and triage center, which pretty much 
had almost done, and then I was just pretty much aide 
to Chief Villani for the rest of the duration of the 
event. I left at 9:30 the next morning. 

Q. So you were there overnight? 

A. Yeah, I was there overnight. I worked 24 
hours straight, and everything else is just like -- I 
don't know. I remember bits and pieces. 

Like I remember walking by with the chief, 
and I remember seeing the airplane engine, you know, 
pieces of, you know, obviously trade center all over. 
When I was walking around, we didn't see any bodies or 
body parts. They had those pretty much either cleaned 
up, or they were buried with the debris, so we really 
didn't see too much of that, but there was no way to 
get even the gaters anywhere near, near Liberty and 



ROBERT KIMBALL 

Trinity. It was just too much debris and hose, and so 
you couldn't even take the gator around. You had to 
walk, I would say, for a two block -- one block area 
this way and like a one and a half, two block area this 
way. You couldn't get the vehicles in. 

Then I do remember that later on during that 
night we did take his car, Chief Villani's, and we did 
take it and park it up -- I believe we made it all the 
way to about Rector maybe. I think it was Rector. 

Q. And West Street? 

A. Yeah. Rector -- yeah, Rector and West, and 
we parked the car there and did another walk up towards 
the site. 

Q. At the end of the evening, how did vehicle 
913 -- where did that end up? 

A. Well, that vehicle stayed at the ferry 
terminal, Staten Island Ferry Terminal, because we 
didn't unload all the equipment. 

Q. So it stayed there? 

A. So it stayed there strictly as a supplement 
to whatever they might have needed down at the ferry 
terminal. I carried oxygen. I carried nebulizers, 
Albuterol, fluids for irrigation, a couple of extra 
long boards, boxes of ACRs in case we needed them, 



ROBERT KIMBALL 

triage tags. Pretty much everything that I can think 
of that we didn't need, that would be stressing out the 
battalion, I took into that vehicle. 

Q. How many days was it before you got the 
vehicle back or do you even know? 

A. Oh, God. 

Q. You did eventually get it back at the 
division? 

A. Yeah, oh yeah. I believe that's how I got 
home. I asked them if they needed it, because they 
were going to shut down that area, I believe. Either 
they were going to shut it down or they released me 
because they didn't need the equipment that was in 
there, because we didn't receive too many people. 

We thought it was going to be a lot more 
casualties, and they figured, you know, we have enough 
here. I loaded up what I could load up, you know, that 
I didn't need too much. I pretty much left them, you 
know, my oxygen that I could leave them, and that was 
really it. 

I believe I took the vehicle back home. 
Yeah, I believe I drove the vehicle home, you know, 
back to the battalion. 

Q. Anything else you want to add or that you can 



ROBERT KIMBALL 

think of? 

A. Well, then I had to have the next day off, 
you know, obviously, but then I went down there, and I 
served as Bobby Brown's aide for the next six weeks 
down at the World Trade Center. 

I believe the first possibly four weeks was 
down at Chambers and West at the EMS command post, and 
then the last two weeks that I served down there was 
down at 10 and 10, Liberty and -- what is that? 
Greenwich? Yes. 

So I served my six weeks down there, and I 
haven't been there since. 

Q. Is that all you have to say? 

A. As far as the events of that day, as far as 
it went with me, yeah. 

MS. BASTEDENBECK: This ends our interview. 

The time now is 1452. 



File No. 9110394 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

LIEUTENANT SPIRO YIORAS 

Interview Date: December 28, 2001 



Transcribed by Nancy Francis 



S. YIORAS 

MR. CUNDARI: Today's date is December 28, 
2001. The time is 10:28 in the morning. I'm George 
Cundari of the New York City Fire Department. I am 
conducting an interview with the following individual: 

Q. Please state your name, rank, title and 
assigned command. 

A. My name is Spiro Yioras, rank is Lieutenant, 
command is Battalion 49, Division 4. 

Q. Lieutenant, can you please tell us the events 
regarding that tragic day of September 11th? 

A. On that day I was taken out of my battalion 
and redeployed to Battalion 46 for the tour due to no 
coverage over there. Initially, I was out on patrol 
when I heard a call come over the radio that there was 
a fire at the World Trade Center. Trying to find out 
more information, I got a message from Captain DeShore 
from Battalion 46 to come back to the station because 
we might be responding down there. As I responded back 
to the station at Battalion 46, we were watching the TV 
news, watching what was going on, and we saw the second 
plane hit the tower. Immediately we locked up the 
offices and we went right down to the Trade Center. 

When we first got down there, we stationed on 
the corner of West Street and Vesey. 



S. YIORAS 

Q. How did you get there? What route did you 
take? 

A. We took the 59th Street bridge over, down 
Second Avenue, and when we got down to like the 20s, we 
crossed over to the west side and we went straight down 
to the Trade Center. 

Upon arriving on the scene, we met up with I 
believe Captain Wells from ERS. He was there. He was 
in charge of the scene and he gave us all assignments. 
I was assigned to staging. While I was doing staging, 
someone else appeared on the scene. I think it was 
Conditions 8. He already had started staging before I 
got there. Since he had everything under control, I 
went back to find Captain Wells and Captain DeShore and 
see what else they wanted me to do, how I was to be 
utilized . 

Upon going back to the corner of West and 
Vesey, I don't know how long I was on the scene, it 
must have been like about maybe 20 minutes, 30 minutes, 
before the first tower collapsed. I just heard a 
rumbling noise and looked up and I saw parts of the 
building coming down and I just started running uptown 
on West Street. 

Q. Prior to that collapse, did you see people, 



S. YIORAS 

injuries coming towards you; were there a lot of 
people? 

A. There were injuries there. There were people 
being loaded into the back of ambulances. I saw some 
of the people from Battalion 49 like Lillo, Abrille. 
They were working 49 Victor. I saw EMTs Paul Adams and 
Mous Diaz. They were working 45 Adam. But once that 
started happening, we all started running and I lost 
track of them. 

I got caught up in the smoke and all the dust 
from the building coming down, and as soon as the dust 
and smoke cleared away, I went back to look for 
personnel because I remembered where they had their 
ambulances parked and basically it was in the area of 
the collapse. As I was searching for the crews, Lillo, 
Abrille, Diaz and Adams, I was also searching for 
Lieutenants Scaringello, Captain DeShore, for Captain 
Wells also and anybody else that I could find. 

Walking down on West Street, I passed this 
overpass, this white overpass that connected from the 
Trade Center to across the street. I believe it had to 
be connected to the American Express building. As I 
went inside, through all the rubble, where all the 
ambulances and all the fire trucks were, I saw body 



S. YIORAS 

parts all over the place. I only found one person 
alive in the whole thing. It was a black female, who I 
believe worked for a private ambulance. I'm not sure 
if it was Metro Care or something like that. She had a 
broken leg. 

I yelled to some firemen that were standing 
by I believe it must have been 1 World Trade Center 
because No. 2 fell first, right? Yes. I had told 
them, you know, if they could come and help me with 
this female over here that had a broken leg, but they 
had injuries that they were taking care of also. Then 
a couple of minutes later, about five, six people 
showed up. I think some were civilians and I think one 
or two people were off-duty EMS personnel. I really 
don't know their names, but they were wearing IDs. 

We grabbed a stair chair out of one of the 
damaged ambulances that were there. I believe it was a 
New York Hospital ambulance. We took a stair chair. 
We carried her across the rubble and I believe it was 
to the American Express building, underneath that 
overpass that connects to it. 

As soon as we got underneath the overpass, 
the second tower collapsed. A lot of it fell close to 
the building and hit me. A couple of things hit me. I 



S. YIORAS 

don't know exactly what hit me. I believe it was some 
bricks or wood. I really don't know. I couldn't tell 
you. But it hurt. It hurt. 

We got stuck inside the American Express 
building. We couldn't get out of there. We couldn't 
find no way. We couldn't see anything. We couldn't 
breathe. I mean, I thought I was going to buy it. I 
really thought I was going to die in there. 

Q. Were you with other crew members, with the 
patient, that girl? 

A. With the patient and the people that helped 
me take the patient out of there. We were all stuck in 
that building. I can't tell you how long we were in 
there. It must have been about 15, 30 minutes. I'm 
just taking a wild guess. I'm saying anywhere from 15 
to 30 minutes before firemen came in and took us out 
the back way of the building. Initially, when we tried 
to get out, all the doors were blocked from debris. We 
couldn't break any of the glass doors because they were 
so thick. I even tried breaking one of the glass doors 
with an oxygen tank and it wouldn't even break. 

But finally, it seemed, like I said, 15 to 30 
minutes before we got out with the firemen, and the 
only reason they came in and got us out was because 



S. YIORAS 

they saw us go into the building after the second 
collapse. I should say before the second collapse they 
saw us go into the building. 

Basically, they took me to the treatment 
center and gave me a little bit of oxygen, but then I 
went right back out there. I went back out there 
looking for my guys and everything else. I found a 
couple of them. I couldn't find Lillo. Abrille, I 
couldn't find him either, but I had heard word that he 
was safe; he might have been injured but he was safe. 
He was down in Battery Park, I believe. One of the 
other crews from 45 Adam, I found Mr. Adams roaming 
around and he was looking for his partner, Mr. Diaz. 
But we later found out that Mr. Diaz was in the 
hospital being treated for a head injury, a minor head 
injury. 

Basically, for the rest of the day we were 
just looking for crew members, firemen. We were 
looking for any patients or anybody that we could find, 
and basically that was it. 

Q. Were your radios working at that time? 
A. The radio was working. That's another thing 
I have to say. Initially, when I found that patient 
after the first collapse, I had called on the radio to 



S. YIORAS 

the command center to see if they could send me 
somebody over to help me with the patient, and they had 
said something like, "We have a lot of patients out 
here and we're trying to deal with it. See if you 
could deal with it by yourself inside over there where 
you are." After that, luckily, the other people came 
by and they helped me. But otherwise, most of the time 
I didn't hear anything on the radio except for that one 
little conversation that I had. 

Q. In the parking garage, you didn't see any 
Chiefs or anyone higher than what you were? 

A. You know, they might have been. 

Q. You couldn't see anything? 

A. But I really couldn't see who it was. I know 
I saw the Chiefs with the white hats, they were out 
there and everything else, but I just couldn't tell you 
who it was. I really couldn't name them. I know after 
the second collapse I saw Chief McCracken, Chief 
Villani, and they were all heading down towards Battery 
Park to regroup, and that was like after the second 
collapse. 

Q. Basically, after the collapse, you really 
found no patients? 

A. No patients, nobody alive. They wouldn't let 



S. YIORAS 

us go back into the scene. They cordoned it off 
because they wanted to keep as many people out because 
they didn't know what else was going to happen, and 
they also said that some of the other buildings might 
not be safe also. So, basically, we tried to see if 
there were any patients or anybody coming up to us. 
But by then everybody had either been dispersed or been 
taken over to the treatment center at Stuyvesant High 
School, I think it was. Basically that was it. 

MR. CUNDARI: Lieutenant, I'd like to thank 
you for taking your time and conducting this 
interview. This concludes the interview. The time now 
is 10:40. 



File No. 9110395 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
RONALD COYNE 
Interview Date: December 28, 2001 



Transcribed by Maureen McCormick 



MR. CUNDARI: The date is December 28, 2001. 

The time is 1122 hours. I'm George Cundari, New 

York City Fire Department. I am conducting an 

interview with the following individual. 

Q. Please state your name, rank and assigned 
command. 

A. Ronald Thomas Coyne, EMT, Battalion 44. 

Q. EMT Coyne, can you please tell us the events 
of that tragic day of September 11? 

A. On September 11, we had just finished 
dropping off a patient at Kings County Hospital, and at 
approximately 8:48 a.m., we heard screaming over the 
radio. We were just about going available. I called 
the dispatcher and said if she needed us, because I 
wasn't sure where exactly this incident was taking 
place, but I told the dispatcher we were available to 
go wherever they needed us . 

She designated us to go to Vesey Street in 
lower Manhattan for what at the time they were 
considering it to be just a plane accident. 

We shot down over by the Brooklyn Bridge. 
When we went over the bridge, we noticed both towers 
were on fire. We made the turn around off the Brooklyn 
Bridge to go on the FDR, and we were stopped by the 



RONALD COYNE 

Police Department to ask if we can carry a doctor. I 
got on the radio, and I notified the dispatcher that we 
were going to transport the doctor over to the World 
Trade Center. 

They acknowledged it, and when we came out of 
the tunnel of -- I'm not sure what street you call it. 
I guess the Westside Highway, the tunnel out of the 
FDR. We got approximately over to the Vista Hotel, 
which was on Liberty, between Liberty and the first 
building, and at that time we saw people running 
towards us and cars gathering all over the place, 
police cars, ambulances, and then we noticed the tower 
was coming down. 

Q. When you first arrived, the towers started 
collapsing? 

A. Soon as we arrived, the south -- the north 
tower had come down. I know it sounds weird, but 
that's the way it was. 

Q. There is a north tower, south tower. You 
think the south tower was the first collapse? You mean 
before the first collapse or the -- 

A. I was there when the first collapse happened. 

Q. So it was most likely the south tower. 

A. So then it was the south? 



RONALD COYNE 

Q. Yeah. 

A. Okay. I could be wrong in the way this is. 
The tower had collapsed. There was debris from the 
roof hitting the front of the ambulance, and we 
couldn't see a thing. I couldn't back up. I couldn't 
go forward. There were too many pedestrians running 
around. 

I decided at that time to shut off all the 
vents, keep the lights on, and I told my partner, who 
was small enough, to try and climb through the back 
window that separates the cab and the back of the bus 
to go into the back with the doctor, and at that time I 
had asked the doctor to open up the NBC kit. 
Q. Do you know the doctor's name? 
A. I don't remember offhand. 

It started to snow gray, and I could start 
getting a little field of vision. I decided at this 
point where -- because traffic was stuck behind us and 
on the side of us, that we would keep the ambulance 
where it was . 

I got out and I started picking up these 
little old men, who were trying the cross the street, 
and they couldn't breathe, and I picked them up over my 
shoulder, two-by-two and carried them to the back of 



RONALD COYNE 

the ambulance and packed in approximately 15 people. 

With that, I saw a Poland Spring truck, and 
the guy told me to start handing out water, if I needed 
it, and I took two cases and started heading out to the 
first tower that fell. I was giving out water to 
people as they were walking by, telling them where my 
ambulance was, so they could be triaged there, and then 
sent over to wherever they were going to send them. 

Q. Did you have any radio communications at that 
time? 

A. I couldn't hear anything. The dispatcher 
couldn't hear me. I couldn't reach the dispatcher. My 
portable wasn't working. 

My main concern was I knew that we had people 
up there. I knew we had our own up there, and I knew 
we had a lot of civilians over there, and I just wanted 
to get up and try and do a rapid triage as fast as 
possible . 

My partner is very new on the job, you know. 
I didn't think she would be as well-suited to do that 
job right then and there, so as I went up towards the 
north building, I noticed I couldn't gain entrance 
around that area because of the destruction of the 
vehicles, the building, so what I did was I went up, I 



RONALD COYNE 

would say, around Cedar or Barclay. No, Cedar. I'm 
not sure which way this is going. 

Q. This is north, this is south on the map. You 
started heading north? 

A. I started up heading up out of the tunnel. 

Q. Yes, you came out of the tunnel, which is not 
the Battery Tunnel, but by the ferry, correct? 

A. Yes. 

Q. You said that was the Westside Highway? 

A. Right, we were here. This building came down 
first . 

Q. The north tower, you mean? 

A. I couldn't gain entry to the south tower, so 
what I did was I walked around Trinity and walked up in 
between the towers over by Washington Avenue, and I 
came up in between the Custom's building and the World 
Trade Center, northeast plaza of the building, and I 
explained -- there was a group of people that were 
trying to open up the exit door on 6 World Trade 
Center, but they couldn't because of debris that had 
fallen all over the place, so I cleared the debris, and 
I went in the basement, and I had counted 25 people. 

I told them, you know -- there were all 
guys . I told them to gather around five-gallon water 



RONALD COYNE 

bottles. I showed them how to make a make-shift masks, 
and I was there to lead them over towards the pier 
where they were picking people up. At that point in 
time, you know, I had time to do six masks by this 
point, and at that time I went back up the same street, 
the same route, around Washington Avenue, and came up 
in between the buildings, and I was looking at the car 
garages, and the cars in the street, and me and three 
buddies of mine from street crime were breaking windows 
in the cars to look for infants and adults, unconscious 
adults, because there was so much dust on them that we 
couldn't see through. 

At that point, I just heard a thunderous 
sound, and I looked up, and I saw the building start to 
topple, start to sway, and it was swaying our way, and 
we just yelled, "Run" and I tried to run as fast as I 
could, and I saw an SUV parked, and I figured that that 
would take some, you know, some of the hit, because I 
knew I couldn't out run the building, and by the time 
it took me to break the back window of the SUV, my 
safety coat was already on fire. My socks were on 
fire. I was already covered with soot and all sorts of 
particles that were coming out of the building. I 
climbed into the truck, and that's when pieces of the 



RONALD COYNE 

building lifted the truck and came through the front 
window and flipped the truck over, and I was trapped in 
there for approximately 25 minutes to a half hour. 

I was falling asleep. I knew I was dying. I 
just prayed that I wouldn't be found like that. I felt 
as if somebody was giving me fresh oxygen. I was able 
to dig my way out myself, out of the truck. I crawled 
into the street through ash and the fire, and I found a 
door, and I opened up the door, and it was a tavern. I 
ran over behind the bar, and I took the seltzer spray 
and started washing my eyes and my face, because it was 
burning, and washing my back. I just -- I was just 
covered with burns and bruises, and I couldn't breathe 
at all. 

What little breath I had was just whatever I 
could get. After that it started to clear up again. I 
searched the entire building to make sure there was 
nobody in it. There was nobody found. Whatever 
apartment doors were open, I just took a peak in to see 
if anybody was on the floor, and then I automatically 
locked the doors and left. Then I left the building, 
and I went back to try and find my partner, and I 
noticed that a lot of the ambulances were torched, 
flipped over, demolished, and I couldn't find my bus. 



RONALD COYNE 

All the buses there were the same. I didn't know what 
to do. I didn't know what to think. I didn't know 
where my partner was. I didn't know where the doctor 
was, and I was just walking around and bringing people 
over to stores that had not been affected by it and 
putting them inside the stores so that they can at 
least get some water and air. Then I ended up running 
into one of the engine companies. 

I explained to the captain who I was . I 
identified myself. I showed him my shield and my rank 
and told him that I couldn't find anybody else from 
EMS, and that I would be more than happy to stay with 
them until a commanding officer finds me and tells me 
where to go. That was directly in front of the north 
tower. There was a fruit place over by the corner, on 
one of the corners, and it had already been blown apart 
by the blast and the collapse. I entered it. I 
started washing off fruit. I had firemen complaining 
of cramping in their stomachs and in their legs, and I 
knew their potassium was dropping. So I was bringing 
out bananas, and apples and all sorts of fruit, baskets 
of them to hand them out to these firemen so that they 
could continue to do their job. I ran into Chief 
McCracken, and he had asked where I had been, and I 



10 
RONALD COYNE 



explained to him that I was trapped in the vehicle for 
about a half hour, and I didn't know where anybody 
was. I couldn't find my partner. He ordered me to go 
to a triage station and start triaging patients. 

So after he pointed out where the triage area 
was, I found my partner, and I just fell to the floor, 
and I started to cry, because I really, really would 
never forgive myself if I lost her. I was triaging the 
patients with the medic from St. Mary's and my partner, 
and we kept trying to go in, and we were pulling out 
bodies . 

I was ordered to go into the ambulances that 
were next to it and strip whatever I could out of them, 
ALS and BLS supplies . We had numerous contaminated 
equipment that we were -- me and one of the -- a buddy 
of mine, whose name is Roger from St. Mary's, ran over 
to Beekman to drop them off to be cleaned off, and they 
gave us a new ambulance and brought it back. 

We still couldn't find our ambulance. We 
didn't know where it was. I saw hands and legs, and I 
saw a woman impaled into a wall across the street from 
the building. I saw people jumping out of the windows 
when they were collapsing, going through cars and 
hitting the pavement, and that was only early in the 



11 



RONALD COYNE 



morning. We sat there all day taking care of firemen 
basically. A lieutenant came up to me and told me that 
I didn't look well, that I should -- I should go back 
to Brooklyn and go get checked out. I kept telling her 
that there was more work to be done. She said she was 
going to check on me in a little bit, and 12 o'clock 
that night she decided to send me back to my division, 
at approximately 2330, twelve o'clock, she decided to 
send me back to the division. 



12 
RONALD COYNE 



13 
RONALD COYNE 



14 



RONALD COYNE 



MR. CUNDARI: I'd like to thank you for 
conducting this interview. The time is 11:46. 
This concludes the interview. 



File No. 9110437 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

CHEVALO WILSON-DeBRIANO 

Interview Date: January 11, 2002 



Transcribed by Nancy Francis 



C.WILSON-DeBRIANO 



LIEUTENANT DUN: Today is January 11th, 
2002. The time is 0615 hours. My name is Richard Dun 
working for the New York City Fire Department. I'm 
conducting an interview with the following individual: 

Q. Please state your name. 

A. Chevalo Wilson-DeBriano . 

Q. And your rank? 

A. Paramedic. 

Q. Where is your location of work? 

A. Battalion 50. 

Q. In your own words, just tell us what happened 
on the day of September 11th. 

A. I was here. I was extra personnel, so I 
didn't have a partner. I was instructed by the -- or 
actually I saw it in the lounge, an incident happened, 
the World Trade Center, fire, listen on Citywide 
radio. They said it was a plane hit. They put MERV 4 
on standby. I was told by the supervisor to stand by, 
if MERV 4 was to roll, I would have to go on with the 
MERV. The second plane hit and then we were told to 
roll, go to Battalion 46 in Elmhurst, Queens, and stand 
by there. 

We ended up going over to Battalion 46. We 
stood by momentarily. Then we were told to roll. We 



C.WILSON-DeBRIANO 

continued from there down Queens Boulevard. We had a 
view of the burning World Trade Centers. When we 
crossed the 59th Street bridge, we heard over the radio 
people screaming that there was a building collapse. 
We crossed Manhattan, went down the west side. We went 
down past Vesey Street, past the pedestrian bridge. We 
stopped the MERV. There was a lot of smoke. We 
started helping a few injured firefighters who came on 
the MERV van for treatment. 

Then we felt a rumble. My partner, who was 
the driver, told me that he thinks there's another 
collapse, so we have to egress by foot and leave the 
vehicle, and it was a rapid, running egress from the 
area with other police officers, firefighters and 
civilians to avoid the debris and dust cloud. 

Q. Do you know exactly where you left the 
vehicle, where the vehicle was parked? 

A. Yes. Approximately, looking at this thing, I 
believe it was beside 6 World Trade Center. Yes. So a 
little south of Vesey Street on the West Side Highway. 

Q. Okay. 

A. We continued. I ended up walking up to 
Chelsea Piers. Then I walked back down to try to find 
my partner. I didn't find him for hours, but he was 



C.WILSON-DeBRIANO 

okay. The vehicle was in bad shape as far as dust. It 
had to be cleaned off. Then we moved the MERV van over 
to another location. I'm just trying to remember the 
actual street. 

Q. When you first arrived, did you see a lot of 
debris, a lot of chaos? 

A. Yes, a lot of chaos, a lot of smoke. You 
couldn't really see. 

Q. Was there a lot of debris on the ground or 
engine parts, body parts? 

A. No, no, I didn't see any of that. I didn't 
see any of that, no. We were on the West Side Highway, 
so I think we were still a distance from that. 

Q. All right. So after the first collapse, you 
relocated? 

A. Well, no. The first collapse had already 
occurred. 

Q. So you were there for the second collapse? 

A. The second collapse, yes. 

Q. Then after the second collapse, you relocated 
down to -- 

A. Well, as I was saying, when we were crossing 
the 59th Street bridge, that's when the first collapse 
occurred. So by the time then we got into Manhattan, 



C.WILSON-DeBRIANO 

we went to the West Side Highway and we stopped the 
van, we stopped the MERV van, and we started treating 
some firefighters. Then the second collapse happened. 

Q. Okay. Then you egressed. 

A. Then we had to egress by foot. 

Q. How long after did you go back to your 
vehicle? 

A. That took a while. I believe it took around 
three hours. Yes, around three hours to get back 
there. 

Q. Did you see any chiefs that you recognized 
who were in the plaza or wherever you were? 

A. In that immediate area, no. 

Q. No officers? 

A. No, I didn't see it. No. Other than when I 
walked up and walked to Chelsea Piers. That's the only 
time I really saw EMS people. I only saw vehicles 
passing. 

Q. Were they parked and covered with debris or 
were they voluntaries just lining up to go in? 

A. At Chelsea Piers? 

Q. On the walk up. 

A. On my walk up I mainly just saw some 
dust-covered vehicles but mainly just emergency 



C.WILSON-DeBRIANO 

vehicles going in and leaving the area. 

Q. Then what did you do after you got to Chelsea 
Piers? 

A. I got to Chelsea Piers. They were just 
lining up. It seemed like there was a lot of confusion 
there. But I couldn't find my driver. I had to check 
all around to see if the driver was there and he wasn't 
there, so I started going back, I started walking back 
to the area. 

Q. You left the MERV down there? 

A. Yes. The MERV was left down by Vesey Street, 
yes. 

Q. So you walked. Did you ever find your 
partner that day? 

A. I did find him. He said he just ran a 
different direction. We had got split up and I did 
find him hours later. 

Q. Did you triage people at Chelsea or did you 
do any work at Chelsea? 

A. At Chelsea, no. They were just lined up 
there. 

Q. So that was the end of the day? 

A. No. We went back. We went to the MERV van. 
It had a lot of dust on it, but the driver had 



C.WILSON-DeBRIANO 

relocated it to another location. Man, if I could just 
remember the street. It was the street that JFK Jr. 
lived on. 

Q. Okay. 

A. But that street, we were there, and then from 
there, from that location, then we started -- we set up 
for triage there and we were pretty much there most of 
the day, then, most of the day, setting up for triage, 
and that's where we ended up viewing the collapse of 7 
World Trade Center, which was another time when we 
ended up having to egress a little bit. 

Q. So about what time did you end the day? 

A. The day was ended -- I worked 23 1/2 hours 
straight. So, if I started at 7:00, it ended like at 
6:00 in the morning by the time we got back. 

LIEUTENANT DUN: That concludes the interview 
with Chevalo. Thank you very much for your time. 



File No. 9110438 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

CAPTAIN JOSEPH RIVERA 

Interview Date: January 14, 2001 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



J. RIVERA 2 

MR. McCOURT: The date is January 14th, 
2002. My name is Tom McCourt, investigator 
for the New York City Fire Department. We 
are currently at the World Trade Center 
command post. Being interviewed is Captain 
Joseph Rivera from Division 4. 

Captain Rivera, would you identify 
yourself, please. 

CAPTAIN RIVERA: Captain Rivera, shield 
number 9815 of the Division 4, Queens 
division. I'm the duty captain assigned 
there. 

Q. Captain, could you please tell me the 
events that transpired from your perspective on 
September 11th, 2001? 

A. What actually transpired -- in fact, 
I'll start from the beginning. On September 11th 
was my first day assigned to the borough of 
Queens. I was transferred from the borough of 
the Bronx. I was to report to their division 
office at 0800 hours in the morning, which I did. 
While there I was awaiting the arrival 
of Chief Carrasquillo to have a one-on-one with 
him, which is when the incident occurred. He 



J. RIVERA 3 

called me up and told me that he was on his way 
in and that we would meet downstairs and head 
into the World Trade Center incident. 

We met downstairs, got into his 
vehicle. We responded, he, myself, his aide and 
an EMT. I have no recollection of the name. 

Q. Do you remember who his aide was? 

A. His aide was Sal San Sangeniti was his 
last name. I don't remember who the EMT was. 
We were in route to Manhattan. We 
exited the Midtown Tunnel. When we exited the 
Midtown Tunnel, the second plane had already hit. 
We arrived there roughly about 9:30 in the 
morning. 

When we got there, we left the car on 
West Street down by I believe it was Rector. I'm 
not sure. I think it was Rector. And we walked 
our way up to where the command post was, which 
was opposite building number two, Two World Trade 
Center . 

Q. What was the action going around at 
that location at that time? What was the 
activity? 

A. It was total mayhem. There were people 



J. RIVERA i 

running all over the place. There were body 
parts on the floor that we noticed. There was 
rubble. There was just total chaos. 

As we were walking up to the command 
post, we were trying to get a gist of was going 
on. When we finally got to the command post, we 
met with Chief Gombo, Captain Sickles and 
Lieutenant Moore, who were already there along 
with other fire officials and some firefighters. 
This wasn't inside the building; this was across 
the street on West Street. 

Q. West and -- 

A. West -- I believe it was between 
Liberty and Vesey. 

Q. Okay. 

A. On the other side of the street. 

While there, we were looking up at the 
fire and we heard a loud rumble; and when we 
looked up, that was the start of the collapse. 
When the building collapsed, ironically we had a 
building behind us that had an underground 
garage, and we all ran into that underground 
garage. In that underground garage we were 
trapped for approximately 10 to 15 minutes. 



J. RIVERA 5 

There were a number of injuries, minor 
injuries. A lot of us were breathing in a lot of 
that powder, whatever you want to call it. 
Anyway, we managed to get out of there. A 
firefighter found a stairwell that brought us up 
about two and a half stories. 

We managed to go up two and a half 
stories, come up out of the building from the 
rear and managed to go around up towards -- what 
is this over here? Up towards North End, running 
down toward North End to where we established a 
command post on Chambers and West. 

Before that we also got caught in the 
second collapse. While we were running, we were 
running and trying to find cover in some of the 
surrounding buildings. Every time we got close 
to one of the buildings, they were telling us 
there was a gas leak and we should get away from 
that building. 

Chief Carrasquillo was under the 
impression that we may have left some people 
behind, so we went back to make sure that 
everybody was accounted for. 

Q. After the second collapse? 



J. RIVERA 6 

A. After the first collapse. 

Q. After the first collapse. 

A. So when we went back, making sure that 
everybody was accounted for, we got caught in the 
second collapse, but we managed to get out of 
that right away. 

What we did is we ran towards the water 
around to North Street and up towards Chambers 
and West, which was where the command post was 
established. While there I took command of the 
MERV and all of the volunteers that were coming, 
hospital staff, doctors, nurses, et cetera. 

Q. When you went back to check for the 
missing people, did you find everybody that was 
missing? 

A. Everybody that was with us was 
accounted for. That was Chief Carrasquillo, 
chief's aide Sal San Sangeniti, Chief Gombo, 
Captain Sickles, Lieutenant Moore. 

Q. Anybody injured at that point? 

A. Lieutenant Terranova. 

Well, the one that was injured was 
Lieutenant Moore. All the rest were overcome by 
this powder, this thing that we were breathing. 



J. RIVERA 7 

Then from there we were on for a good 
25, 26 hours, the regular operation. 

Q. Right. You stayed there the whole -- 

A. Yeah. 

Q. Until the next day? 

A. Yeah. We were able to go home and come 
back the next day and start it all over again. 

I wasn't injured. I breathed in a lot 
of the stuff. Luckily I wasn't injured. 

I don't know what to say. I think we 
were all traumatized. I think the only real 
injury that I remember was Lieutenant Moore. 

Q. What was the extent of his injuries? 

A. I think it was a leg injury. He hasn't 
been back on duty, but I think it was a leg 
injury. 

Q. Is there anything else that you can add 
or you might want to add to it? 

A. No. So many things happened. After we 
left the building that we were trapped in, a 
number of things had happened. There was a 
building there that had senior citizens 
supposedly trapped in the basement, so we were 
trying to get them evacuated. Then they told us 



J. RIVERA 8 

not to, that it was probably safer to keep them 
in the basement because of all of the dust in the 
air. 

Then there were other people that would 
run to us with minor injuries, cuts and bruises 
and stuff. We were trying to give aid when we 
were in route to -- actually running for our 
lives, running away from the site to the command 
post . 

Q. Did you experience any radio problems 
or communication problems or anything like that 
at all? 

A. I think everybody experienced radio 
problems. We were trying the contact each other 
to make sure everybody was accounted for. We 
couldn't get across. Too many people on the 
radio. The radio traffic was horrendous. 

Q. All right. There's nothing else you 
can add -- 

A. No, that's it. A half hour felt like 
30 days. But that's it. That's all I can think 
of now. 

Q. Okay, Captain. Thank you very much. 
MR. McCOURT: The time is 557 hours. 

That concludes this interview. 



File No. 9110454 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

PARAMEDIC KENNETH DAVIS 

Interview Date: January 15, 2002 



Transcribed by Nancy Francis 



K. DAVIS 

LIEUTENANT DUN: The date is January 15, 
2002. The time is 1540 hours. My name is Richard Dun 
of the New York City Fire Department. I'm conducting 
an interview with the following individual: 

PARAMEDIC DAVIS: Kenneth Davis, paramedic, 
Shield No. 3204 of Battalion 22. 

Q. In your own words, could you please tell us 
what happened on the day of September 11th, 2001. 

A. The morning of September 11th, I was going to 
do some volunteer work for Mark Green in Manhattan, and 
we met in Long Island City at the union office. From 
the union office we were going over to the city, a 
bunch of us in a van, and we took the 59th Street 
bridge. As we were driving over the 59th Street 
bridge, just looking out the window, we saw a plane hit 
the World Trade Center, what we thought was a plane, 
and out of disbelief, I was like did anybody else just 
see that? They're like what? I said a plane just hit 
the Trade Center. Everybody was like, oh, yeah, 
right. When they looked, you could see the flames and 
the smoke starting and they're like, wow, it must have 
been one of the little planes. I said, no, it looked 
like a jet. So now everybody was in panic because we 
didn't know, it was a clear day and we figured, well, 



K. DAVIS 

is it terrorists, is it accidental? It was such a 
clear day, you can avoid it but... 

So we went over to Mark Green's office and we 
got on the phone and called to see where they needed 
us. We figured if something big like that, you'd find 
out where everybody's got to be. They asked us to go 
up to Metropolitan to pick up an ambulance up there and 
whatever equipment they could give us. A bunch of us 
shot up there in a van. From there we went down the 
FDR Drive towards the Trade Center and there were just 
thousands of people running towards you on the FDR. It 
was surreal. 

So we got down to South Street, to the ferry 
terminal, and set up a triage station. There was a 
doctor there, an anesthesiologist, I believe Mark Heath 
was his name. I know he shot a lot of video on his 
digital camera while he was there also. I helped him 
set up triage in an area upstairs in the ferry 
terminal. 

Q. Were you receiving a lot of patients at this 
time? 

A. Not what we were expecting because a lot of 
people were just getting out of there. 

Q. Running by you. 



K. DAVIS 

A. Just running. Basically, you saw people that 
were wounded and you were grabbing them because they 
were in such a state of shock that they didn't know 
what was going on any more than you did and they just 
wanted to get out of there. Some people, as you were 
grabbing them, they didn't want to sit still for 
anything, so you were just grabbing their clothes and 
using their clothing as bandages and just say okay, 
fine, hold this and keep going, you know, don't go back 
that way. I saw some patients at the ferry, and the 
building had already collapsed, the first tower, so we 
went down, a couple of us, to the site to see if we 
could help down there, and it was just sheer madness. 
You couldn't see anything with all the dust in the air. 

Q. Did the first building go down yet? 

A. Yes, the first building had already come 
down. 

Q. Okay. 

A. What made it really bad was just trying to 
breathe. It's not fog, it's ash, and you could only 
see so far. But, literally, we didn't have masks yet 
or anything because we just were there. We found 
bottled water or whatever and cracked hydrants. You 
were just scooping water into your mouth and spitting 



K. DAVIS 

mud out and people were running by you and they're 
running in every direction because they didn't know 
which way to go. 

Q. Was there a lot of chaos and confusion? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Did you see any officers from the service? 

A. There were police officers everywhere, 
firemen everywhere, apparatus all over the place. It 
was kind of like a discotheque, the easiest way to 
describe it, the lights from the trucks and the fog 
machines, that's how it looked, and people screaming 
and just running and you're tripping over each other. 

Q. So did you leave your vehicle at the South 
Street Seaport? 

A. We were transported up. They had taken a 
couple of patients to the hospital. 

Q. Which one? Beekman? 

A. I believe Beekman. So we hopped a ride up 
and jumped down from there and ran up there. 

Q. And went on foot? 

A. Yes. 

Q. So at this time you had no longer -- 

A. I no longer had a vehicle. But they were 
everywhere. Some were crushed already, melted 



K. DAVIS 

looking. But they were everywhere. The keys were in 
them. You could get in if you needed it and go. But 
it was a mess, going through the ashes, some places a 
foot thick, two feet thick. 

Q. This is still the first building? 

A. Yes. The second building had just started to 
come down and you could feel the rumble in the ground, 
and we were like, it can't be the train because you 
know it's not running. So we all started to run down 
the street and the building had come down. 

Q. Which way did you run? 

A. Honestly, I don't remember which street I was 
on. It was just, like I said, it was chaos, and 
running down the block I had tripped and fallen and my 
left knee blew out and I fell on it and I was in a lot 
of pain. I was just holding it and a fireman and a 
police officer grabbed me and dragged me up the 
street. But meanwhile, while I was laying there, I 
reached down to see what I had fell over and it was 
somebody's lower leg that had apparently got blown off 
them in the explosion. So that was pretty sick to say 
the least. 

I got up the street, got some tape from one 
of the firemen up at the corner that had some supplies, 



K. DAVIS 



I taped up my knee and I kept working. Again, it was 
just trying to get people out of there, get them to 
different hospitals and whatever. 

Q. Did you see any EMS officers that you 
recognized? 

A. At Ground Zero you'd see so many people. 

Q. Do you remember in what location around 
Ground Zero? 

A. Over on the side of -- well, I saw some 
people by Trinity Church. 

Q. So that's down here. Trinity is down this 



way. 



A. 
Q- 

A. 



Then over on the other side by City Hall. 

City Hall is over this way. 

Yes. They were setting up in a building. 
They were starting to set up inside one of the 
buildings over there. 

Q. So you were more on -- 

On this side, yes. 

The east side; you were on the east side? 

Right. The eastern side, yes. 

Okay. 

It was on Broadway, I believe, a building on 



Broadway. They were setting up inside the building 



K. DAVIS 

that they wanted to get patients in there and that 
building started to tremble a little. So they said, 
hey, let's get out of here, too. So everything we had 
just brought in there we started handing back and forth 
like a big convoy, just handing it back and forth to 
each other out of there. Then they were going to set 
up in City Hall Park, and I said you can't, it's 
outside, you can't have patients in all this soot, you 
can't breathe. So then they were moving them down to 
another building over that way and I said, well, they 
had enough people there. My knee is really hurting. I 
said, if something else collapses, I'm not going to be 
able to run, so let me get back down to the ferry 
terminal and help there. So that's when I went back to 
the ferry terminal. 

Q. That was South Ferry? 

A. Right. 

Q. Because they had (inaudible)? 

A. Yes. This is Whitehall Street, whatever it 
is. 

Q. South Ferry. 

A. So we were over there and we had the triage 
set upstairs, and basically it was just a lot of bumps 
and bruises that we were seeing because a lot of people 



K. DAVIS 

were just getting on boats and ferry boats and leaving 
and they had barges that pulled up, people just got on 
them to get them out of the city, to get them over to 
Brooklyn or to Jersey, wherever they took them. But it 
was a lot of bumps and bruises, a few broken bones, 
gashes, cuts. It was not as many patients as we really 
thought we were going to see. 

Q. Did you see anybody that were missing that 
you know of? 

A. Not that I know of. I know people that are 
missing or have been declared dead and I know of them. 
I don't recall if I saw them or not that morning 
because some of them I was close to, I honestly don't 
remember if I saw them that morning or if I'm just 
remembering them in my head because I saw lots of 
people there. It's just crazy. It was craziness. 
You'd hear the alarms from some of the firemen's Scott 
packs going off. 

Q. Did you have a radio that day? 

A. No. I didn't have radios they give out, and 
if you had one, you couldn't get through to anybody 
because everybody was screaming. 

Q. That was the thing, because they're trying to 
clarify, people who had radios, were they able to 



10 

K. DAVIS 



communicate? 

A. I don't think so. Like every fireman that I 
was around that had one -- 

Q. Mayday Mayday. 

A. It was all Maydays, it was guys yelling we're 
over here, we're over there, we got one here. It was 
nuts. The police that were down there were really -- 
they were phenomenal. They were just grabbing stuff 
and helping everybody. The firemen, they're used to 
doing the disaster stuff, but it was just so 
overwhelming. But the police were really -- they were 
a lot of help. I would say, hey, can you grab this and 
they were like yeah. It was really good. 

Q. So about what time did you wrap up? 

A. Well, I went back to the ferry terminal after 
I got hurt and I stayed there until almost 11:00 
o'clock that night before they told me it's now time 
for me to go to the hospital. I would have stayed. I 
guess the adrenaline keeps you going. 

Q. Did you go to the hospital? 

A. Yes. I ended up going on the ferry over to 
Staten Island to St. Vincent's. They x-rayed me, 
medicated me and all, and I went home. Since then I've 
had to have surgery on my leg. 



11 

K. DAVIS 



But it was pretty intense over there. I know 
guys that were looking for their ambulances when they 
went back, they weren't there. Somebody could have 
just used it or whatever. But it was weird. You'd go 
down the street and see parts of an airplane, the 
wheels, that were in the middle of an intersection in 
one corner and it's part of a plane. You don't expect 
to see that in Manhattan. 

LIEUTENANT DUN: Okay. This concludes the 
interview with Kenneth Davis. The time now is 1550 
hours. 



File No. 9110455 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
PARAMEDIC JOSEPH JEFFERSON 
Interview Date: January 16, 2002 



Transcribed by Nancy Francis 



J. JEFFERSON 

LIEUTENANT DUN: Today is January 16, 2002. 
The time is 7:40. My name is Richard Dun working with 
the New York City Fire Department. I'm conducting an 
interview with. . . 

PARAMEDIC JEFFERSON: Joseph Jefferson, 
paramedic from Battalion 26, Shield No. 2410. 

Q. In your own words, can you just tell us what 
happened on the day of September 11th, 2001. 

A. Basically, we were doing our tour of duty or 
we were in the beginning stages of our tour of duty and 
we were at Bronx-Lebanon Hospital, we were in the 
Bronx, which is about 173rd Street and Grand Concourse, 
when we heard that a plane had struck the World Trade 
Center. We were still basically finishing up. Then we 
heard that the second plane hit. We were in contact 
with the dispatcher, who said that she needed some 
units to go down there. So we were dispatched to go 
down to the World Trade Center. So we left from there 
and went down to the World Trade Center. 

Q. Did you take the streets or did you go to the 
highways? 

A. We took the streets to the highway, 
basically. 

Q. Okay. When you got down there, how was it? 



J. JEFFERSON 

What was it like when you pulled up or when you got 
close to the site? 

A. Well, once we got -- we took the FDR and we 
came around the back, the back way, up West Street 
from -- 

Q. South Ferry. 

A. South Ferry, that exit. When we got down 
there, it was just almost like a death silence. I 
guess you could say it looked like a war zone I guess. 

Q. Did you see a lot of debris? 

A. You could see part of the plane or what we 
thought might have been. There were cars on fire. 
There were body parts . 

Q. Was there a lot of chaos, people running, 
trying to get away? 

A. From the angle that we approached, from that 
side, there wasn't a lot going on. There were numerous 
vehicles that were heading towards Ground Zero, I 
guess, which is what we call it now. 

Q. At that point, when you got there, did the 
first building collapse already? 

A. No. We got there before the buildings came 
down . 

Q. Before the buildings came down. So the 



J. JEFFERSON 

buildings were still standing? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Okay. 

A. So as we drove up, I guess we got to -- I'm 
looking at the picture now. I'm trying to see where is 
West . 

Q. This is going uptown and that's downtown. 

A. So we were coming up this way and there was 
somebody -- 

Q. Liberty and West? There was a triage 
station . 

A. We actually never made it up to the triage 
center. This is the tower right here, right? 

Q. Right. 

A. This is the first one that came down? 

Q. Right. 

A. As we got to about here, traffic was being 
diverted to go from the northbound lane to the 
southbound. They were setting up the vehicles there. 
We turned to go up that way and a firefighter came 
running out from one of the towers and he was basically 
saying are you guys medics? He flagged us down, are 
you guys medics? We're like, yeah, what's going on? 
He said, well, one of our firefighters is down and we 



J. JEFFERSON 



need some help. We have EMTs in there and they're 
screaming for medics. So I stopped the vehicle, came 
around, grabbed my trauma bag. My partner got out of 
the vehicle and said you want me to grab the other 
stuff or what? So I said okay, yeah, grab it and run 
ahead a little bit to see what they have. 

Q. Is that where you left your vehicle and that 
was the last time you saw the vehicle or you got back 
to it? 

A. We got back to it. 

Q. Oh, okay. Because people left vehicles. 

A. Right. So I guess the vehicle was parked on 
like the side street. 

Q. On the west side before Liberty? 

A. Right. So as I went down that block towards 
the World Trade Center, No. 2 building, they were 
bringing him up on a stretcher and we actually met him 
on the corner there, and they had their vehicle and the 
BLS vehicle was there and they were in the back. So I 
jumped in to see and it was the firefighter who had I 
think got hit by someone that had jumped out. 

Q. Do you remember his name? 

A. No. I don't recall. 



J. JEFFERSON 



|. Plus know where 

my partner is. My partner never met me at the 
vehicle. So she said, well, just go to the hospital. 
So basically what I did was I went back into the 
vehicle, I grabbed my equipment and I exited the 
vehicle, closed the door, and the BLS took him to the 



J. JEFFERSON 

hospital with about four firefighters. 

So I went back to where I believed the 
vehicle was supposed to be but it wasn't there. So I 
said where's my bus? Anybody seen 302? Anybody seen 
302? He said yeah, yeah, he went off that way. I said 
what? He said yeah, your partner took the vehicle. I 
said no. I was like he didn't leave me. I know he 
didn't. So it was like where is he? So then I was 
looking around, I turned back around, and right about 
where I had met the other guy, my partner pulled the 
vehicle up here -- 

Q. To Liberty? 

A. To Liberty. 

-- to try and meet us and somehow we missed 
each other. But the vehicle was there, but he wasn't. 
So I went to the vehicle, I went to open the door and 
the door was locked. I went around to the other side 
to try and see if I could get the equipment out, and as 
I was standing there, I heard this rumbling and I 
looked up and the building was coming down. 

Q. That was the first building coming down? 

A. That was the first building, yes. 

Q. Okay. 

A. So I took off and I ended up hiding on -- I 



J. JEFFERSON 

ran past -- I guess that's 90. The building that was 
the next over is 90 West. I remember I passed that 
building (inaudible) into the building. So I turned 
around to run into the building, but the stuff was 
coming down so fast that I wasn't able to get into the 
building. So I ended up hiding in the windowsill 
trying to cover up and basically the stuff was coming 
past me like an avalanche, you know, it sounds like a 
freight train. So I looked back and I saw like this 
big piece of wall about -- it had to be about maybe 
four feet long and about three feet wide or something 
like that, it came across my back, knocked me down to 
my knees. I was like, God, I'm going to get buried 
alive here because there wasn't that much space. I 
tried to break the window to get into the window and 
there was a fence, a gate inside of the window, so I 
couldn't climb into the building through there. So I 
was just there waiting until it all stopped. 

Once it stopped, you know, I'm sure it sounds 
very familiar, it was like just nothing, just silence 
and you couldn't see because of the cloud of dust. 

Q. Did you have a radio that day? 

A. I had a radio. 

Q. Were there any transmissions going on? 



J. JEFFERSON 

A. At that point I didn't have the radio. 

Q. Okay. 

A. But it was just silence. Then, trying to 
breathe, it was like you started coughing and gagging. 
Then you started hearing people calling out for help 
(inaudible) . I stood there for a couple of seconds and 
then I heard a couple of secondary explosions and some 
vehicles were engulfed in flames, you know, they were 
on fire. So I go this is not the place to be. I hope 
I'm talking up loud enough. I grabbed my trauma bags 
and put it back on my shoulder and I started feeling 
around. I called out for help a couple times for 
myself and then I realized I'm supposed to be the 
help. Then I started telling people come towards my 
voice, come towards my voice, because I knew I was on 
West Street, I didn't know exactly where, but I knew 
that, if they were further into where the buildings 
were, they should probably come out towards this way 
and walk up towards the South Ferry. 

I saw a female cop. She had a flashlight, so 
she was able to help direct the people who went into 
one of the buildings, and they had already had some 
water and they had garbage cans filled with ice set 
up. So some people came in and began to like wash 



10 
J. JEFFERSON 



their faces off and stuff like that. There was a 
vehicle parked, Vehicle 440. It was parked like in 
front of that building. So I went inside that vehicle 
and hooked up with an EMT, she was from Jacobi, with a 
guy who was injured a little bit, he had hurt his leg. 
So I treated him. 

Q. Okay. 

A. What else? I mean, it was so much. As I was 
treating him, another EMT came in and he was hurt. A 
medic was bringing him and she said Eddie's hurt bad. 
He had a gash in his back and his arm was broken. So I 
splinted his arm. 

Q. Eddie who? 

A. Martinez. 

Q. Martinez. 

A. The EMT, his last name was Joseph. 

Q. From Jacobi? 

A. From Jacobi. Lamanna was the medic that 
brought Eddie over there. But as I splinted his arm 
and treated him (inaudible) . As I splinted his arm, I 
was helping (inaudible) and stuff like that and we told 
him grab some equipment because I don't think that this 
would be a good place, it might be a collapse, it's 
damaged or crushed, if not totally destroyed. So I 



11 

J. JEFFERSON 



said, if anything else falls, because I didn't know how 
much of the building fell, I didn't know whether it was 
just the top or whatever, I said I don't want us -- 
being inside the vehicle is not going to be the safest 
place, so let's just grab some equipment, couple up the 
02 and bandages and stuff like that and let's get into 
this building. Basically we were moving towards, like 
I said, back towards South Ferry. I hadn't seen any 
supervision or anybody, basically, except the few 
people that had been. . . 

So as we went into the next building, I said 
let's go into this next building, wait a couple of 
seconds. Other people were coming in. That's when I 
met up with my partner. We basically experienced 
almost the same thing. He was hiding in another 
windowsill because he was unable to get into the 
buildings. But after that a few more people came in 
and we said, listen, we're going to try and get you 
guys out of here, just stay put for a second and just 
make sure that it clears up a little bit and we're 
going to get you guys as far to safety as we can. 

Eddie Martinez started feeling a little bit 
worse. I thought that he might be developing a 
pneumothorax because of the size of the gash in his 



12 
J. JEFFERSON 



back. It was pretty deep. I sent him with Karen 
Lamanna and another voluntary EMT in a stair chair with 
oxygen towards the treatment area. I heard there was 
some kind of treatment there at South Ferry. I said 
get him down there, they had some buses or whatever, 
and I said I'm going to double back and help the people 
that were left. 

Q. Building 2 still didn't come down yet? 

A. No. After they went down -- 

Q. South. 

A. South. I went back and I said okay 
everybody, let's get a head count and see how many 
people are in here and we're going to start -- so I 
went back out -- I said stay here and let me just make 
sure the coast is clear, and as I was going out to go, 
that's when the second building came down. So I ran 
back in the building. It felt a little bit safer 
because it was one of the big buildings. So I sent 
them as far back into the middle of the building as 
possible. The windows were shaking. It was like all 
over again. 

After that subsided, a couple more people 
came trickling in. After cleaning them up, we did a 
head count and we had like about 20 people. So little 



13 
J. JEFFERSON 



by little, as it cleared up, we brought them down, went 
into another little place, you know, it was like taking 
them section by section, and we got all the way down to 
where there's like a health club or something that was 
down there. 

Q. New York City Health and Racquet? 

A. Right. We got them there and I told them 
listen, I said remember my name, I'm Paramedic 
Jefferson, I said I'm going to get you guys out of 
here, I don't know exactly how, but just stay put. 
There are some bathrooms facilities here and there are 
some phones, if you want to make a phone call or 
something, do that, and I'll be back in a couple 
minutes and we're going to get you out of here. 

So my partner and I left there and started 
walking down towards south and, funny thing, a lady in 
a mini school bus drives by and she's like, excuse me, 
I need to find the Brooklyn Bridge, I need to get 
across it. I said, ma'am, I can't promise you I can 
get you across the Brooklyn Bridge, I said, but I need 
your help. I have about 20 people that I need to get 
over to the hospital, would you mind giving some 
assistance? She said I don't know, I've got to ask my 
boss, I've got to ask my boss. So she calls and 



14 
J. JEFFERSON 



initially he goes no, no, get back to the house. It's 
like can you tell him -- he has to have heard on the 
news, we're in the middle of a crisis here and we 
really need his help. So she says the paramedics 
really need the help, and he was like okay. It's like 
what is he going to say? 

Q. You could have commandeered them. 

A. Basically, that's what we ended up basically 
doing. I said tell him that you're giving us a hand. 
We need the use of this vehicle. So we took it back to 
the Health and Racquet Club and we got all the people 
and got them lined up. We had a lady with a baby, this 
was like an infant, still only maybe a month or two 
old, a guy with two cats and a lady with a little dog. 
It ended up being like about 22 people that we put 
inside the school bus and we drove them up to Bellevue 
Hospital in the school bus. 

After that we doubled back and came back 
down. We got as far as the Brooklyn Bridge. I said 
I'll take you to the bridge, ma'am. I can't promise 
you that you'll get across, but I can take you there. 
So we brought her back down there and my partner and I 
walked from the Brooklyn Bridge back to the World Trade 
Center, and we treated some other firefighters. 



15 
J. JEFFERSON 



Q. Did you ever make it to a treatment center or 
a triage center? 

A. For us to get looked at? 

Q. No. From the Brooklyn Bridge, you went 
back. You just were free-lancing in the street, 
helping people? 

A. Once we got all the way back there, we ran 
into one of the chiefs. I forget the name at this 
time. But basically, once we got all the way back down 
there, it was still kind of chaotic, but there was 
still a little order -- 

Q. There was an EMS officer around at that time? 

A. Yes, there was an EMS officer around at that 
time . 

Q. Okay. 

A. He said, listen, I want you to gather all our 
people, try and keep them together here. He sent out a 
couple of groups to scavenge some equipment together 
and so we had a little treatment center that we were 
setting up right on -- I think it was actually right on 
Liberty towards the water. 

Q. Liberty and West. South End Avenue. 

A. We were like up in here. 

Q. South End Avenue. 



16 
J. JEFFERSON 



A. So that's where we staged and basically we 
were treating people and we were helping. I didn't 
even realize the extent of some of our own -- I think 
that was -- we stayed there -- I don't even remember 
exactly what time we left, but I know my partner's 
shoulder began to hurt more, my wrist was a little 
swollen, I had a cut, I got a couple of stitches. 

Q. So you basically stayed a lot after, like 
after 9:00 o'clock, roughly? 

A. I think we eventually got back here about 
9:00, between 8:00 and 9:00, 10:00 o'clock, somewhere 
around there. 

Q. That's good enough. 

A. We were there well into the evening. 

Q. All right. Anything else you'd like to add? 

A. Anything like what? I mean, while I was 
there, all that we could do was really pray that we 
would come out alive, everything was happening, and it 
was just basically God's mercy that we were able to 
survive . 

LIEUTENANT DUN: Okay. That concludes the 
interview with Mr. Jefferson. The time is 8:00 
o ' clock . 



File No. 9110456 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

EMT WILLIAM TRUOCOLLO 

Interview Date: January 16, 2002 



Transcribed by Elisabeth F. Nason 



W. TRUOCOLLO 

MR. DUN: Today's date is January 16, 2002. 

My name is Richard Dun. The time is 0700 hours. 

I'm with the New York City Fire Department. 

Q. I'm conducting an interview with William -- 

A. Truocollo. 

Q. Truocollo? 

A. Battalion 26, shield number 1585, working 18 
Charlie. 

Q. Can you tell me in your own words the events 
leading on September 11, 2001? 

A. We were assigned to the tower collapse, at 
which point we went down the -- we went local to 
Manhattan, because the West Side Highway was backed 
up. Once we got down there, we parked in front of 125 
Barclay and that's where we met Chief Wells. He told 
us to get everything on a stretcher, all our equipment, 
and we walked with him and he staged us at Liberty and 
West. Just pretty much watching people jump or fall 
out of the towers. I don't really remember radio 
transmissions because there was so much noise. But we 
maybe were there 10 minutes. 

Q. Was there a lot of chaos when you pulled up? 

A. Yes. I mean we didn't know where to go 
initially. The Chief happened to pull up right next to 



W. TRUOCOLLO 

us. 

Q. Were there a lot of civilians running around? 

A. Yes, there was people running all over the 
place. A lot of emergency vehicles going back and 
forth. People almost getting hit by police cars and 
everything shooting around over there. So from the 
whole time we were down there, when we went to the 
staging area, maybe about 10 minutes, 15 minutes. We 
were told, grab the stretcher, we are going into -- I 
don't even remember. I think we were going into the 
Marriott to stage in there. I was just looking up to 
make sure nobody fell or jumped on us. We got in front 
of the -- I believe it was the Marriott. I just heard 
somebody yell run. I tried to run back towards the 
staging area. 

Q. Was that the first collapse? 

A. Yes. I woke up. I was partially underneath 
a -- I don't know. It had to be some type of motor 
vehicle, because I could see the exhaust and there was 
a firemen digging my leg, because my legs got buried, 
the rest of me was underneath the car. That was it. 
I remember he pulled me out and I actually 
thought a plane was coming because of the roaring 
sound. That's when he told me the tower collapsed. We 



W. TRUOCOLLO 

went into what was supposed to be a safer location and 
we were there maybe not even 5 minutes when they 
evacuated us and then we heard -- I heard another 
collapse. I don't know if that was 7 or if that was 
the other tower. 

Q. That was probably the other tower. 7 
collapsed much later. 

A. Later. I was already -- we went through the 
-- past the West Side Highway and they put me on a 
boat, the Jersey City police harbor boat and that was 
it. I went to Jersey. 

Q. That was the end of your day? 

A. Yes. I mean I was admitted there. I had 
various injuries and everything. 

Q. Because I interviewed your partner 
(inaudible) than getting hurt (inaudible), triage or 
anything (inaudible). 

A. Yes. Like I said we were staging, we went 
over there. We were told by Chief Wells we are going 
into the triage area. The last thing I remember even 
telling my partner, I was looking up at the towers and 
the last thing I said was, you know, I don't think we 
should be near these buildings and that was it. That 
was really it. 



W. TRUOCOLLO 

I didn't treat any patients. It was just 
chaotic. We were just running and screaming. Nobody 
wanted to be where we were at. Everybody was trying to 
get away from it. 

MR. DUN: This concludes the interview. It's 
705 hours. 



File No. 9110457 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMT JOSEPH CONZO 
Interview Date: January 16, 2002 



Transcribed by Elisabeth F. Nason 



J. CONZO 

MR. DUN: Today is January 16, 2002. The 

time is 5:45 a.m. My name is Richard Dun of the 

New York City Fire Department. 

Q. Conducting an interview with -- 

A. JOSEPH CONZO, EMT, shield number 2577, 
assigned to Battalion 26 in the South Bronx. 

Q. At this time in your own words, could you 
describe the events leading on September 11, 2001? 

A. On September 11, 2001, I was assigned to 18 
Charlie, tour 2, out of Battalion 26. We responded to 
the World Trade Center from the Bronx. I'm not sure of 
the approximate time, but it was after the first plane 
crash . 

En route to the World Trade Center, the 
second plane hit, half way down there. Going down the 
West Side Highway, we responded down the West Side 
Highway and we got down there. I was fortunate enough 
to park my vehicle 301 by 125 Barclay Street, about 2 
or 3 blocks from the World Trade Center. 

From there, there was multiple volunteer 
units, multiple fire apparatuses, PD, so on and so on. 

Q. When you got to the scene, was it chaotic, a 
lot of people? 

A. It was pretty much chaotic. Just multiple 



J. CONZO 

units just coming in and stuff like that. We were told 
to respond to a staging area which was directly across 
the street from, I think the Marriott. Directly across 
the street. That's where everybody was staging up with 
their equipment and the first Chief I encountered was 
Chief Charlie Wells, along with Captain Karen DeShore. 

Q. Were there a lot of patients, walking wounded 
around? 

A. At that time no, it was just multiple fire 
suppressions and PD and EMS units. We were all told to 
stage across the street with our equipment. We were 
told to put on our helmets, our turnout coats and stuff 
like that. At that time, there was just multiple fire 
personnel, fire suppressions running in and out of the 
buildings, stuff like that. Both towers were burning 
at the time. There really wasn't any debris coming 
down from our side and that's it. 

As we staged across the street, Chief Charlie 
Wells grabbed my partner and I and said we are going 
into the building. From this map here, we entered the 
Marriott Hotel on Liberty, on west side and Liberty and 
as soon as we were entering in there with our 
equipment, we heard what seemed to be a third plane 
hitting, but I found out later it was the collapse of 



J. CONZO 

the World Trade Center 2 . 

As that was happening, Chief Wells instructed 
us to run. I ran into the building and Chief Wells and 
my partner ran back towards the staging. I was 
fortunate enough to seek cover under a table there 
while the building collapsed and subsequently escaped 
unharmed. 

Q. Were you trapped? 

A. Yes, I was trapped for about -- I don't know, 
a good 15, 20 minutes. It was just total chaos. It 
was myself and three other firemen. The entrance we 
had came in was totally sealed off, another entrance 
was totally sealed off. It was totally pitch black. 
Dust, debris, just complete serene atmosphere. The 
only noise that was going on after the rumbling was the 
firemen's passive alarms going off. 

Fortunate enough for us, a wall had collapsed 
down into the street. We were able to climb out. I 
didn't even know I was out in the street until I walked 
into a light pole. That's how black and dark it was. 

After getting out and searching for my 
partner and Chief Wells, I couldn't find them, I 
proceeded across the street into a store there where I 
cleared my face and just started searching for 



J. CONZO 

survivors. I fortunately found my partner about 10 
minutes after getting out of the building. He was 
completely buried under debris and stuff like that. I 
found him and a fireman. 

I grabbed him, we proceeded to walk towards 
the water and I linked up with Captain DeShore, 

| and a few other EMTs . We helped 



evacuate some injured firemen and civilians on to these 
boats that were coming over from Jersey. I don't know, 
about 15 minutes after that, the building that we were 
in collapsed, the second collapse happened. 

From then on, my partner was already on the 
boat . 

Q. The second building, was that 7 World Trade 
Center? 

A. Yes , yes . 

Q. So that's the third building? 

A. Okay. Yes, third building. My partner was 
already on the boat to Jersey, because he was injured. 
Karen DeShore, a few other EMTs and firemen were on the 
boat, and I stood there and I was fortunate enough to 
commandeer a golf cart, a gator, which was the only 
thing that could possibly maneuver, so I started 
evacuating patients to the ferries and stuff like 



J. CONZO 

that. 

Later on, after evacuating a lot of people 
from the waterway there, I ran into Chief McCracken 
and became his personal driver, and gatored him for the 
rest of the day. Then I stood the rest of the day down 
at South Ferry. 

Q. So around what time did you end your day? 

A. I ended the day about 1 o'clock that morning. 

Q. Is there anything else you would like to add? 

A. No, that's basically it. We did the best we 
could. Not I nor anybody else that I spoke to who was 
down there even imagined these buildings collapsing. 
We staged where we were told to stage and we just 
followed orders. We did the best we could. 

MR. DUN: This concludes the interview with 

JOSEPH CONZO. The time now is 550 hours. 



File No. 9110463 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
PARAMEDIC ROBERTO ABRIL 
Interview Date: January 17, 2002 



Transcribed by Elisabeth F. Nason 



R. ABRIL 

MR. MURAD: Today is January 17, 2002. The 
time is 0800 hours. My name is Murray Murad of 
the Fire Department of the City of New York. I'm 
conducting an interview with the following 
individual. 

Q. Please state your name, your rank and your 
command please? 

A. Paramedic Abril, Battalion 49. 
Q. This interview is being conducted at 
Battalion 49 in Astoria station. This is regarding the 
events of September 11, 2001. Would you please give us 
your perspective on that day, on what happened on that 
tragic day? 

A. We were working. We started to work at 8 
o'clock. We got a job for an OB comp, somewhere in 
Astoria, and we went to aid, to help one of the BLS 
units here, I think it was 5 Adam, with a patient. We 
ended up going 82 to Elmhurst. 

When we were 81 at Elmhurst, we received -- 
the guy on 6 Zebra told us that we were assigned to the 
World Trade Center, because a plane had hit one of the 
buildings. I didn't believe it to begin with and I 
told Carlos that we had to go to the World Trade Center 
because there was a plane that crashed into the 



R. ABRIL 

building. 

We took off 63 from Elmhurst. We went down 
Woodside Avenue to Queens Boulevard and took the 
Midtown Tunnel through. 

Q. Just one question. Sorry to interrupt you. 
Who was your partner on that day? 

A. Carlos Lillo. 

Q. Carlos was your partner? 

A. We went down to the Midtown Tunnel, but at 
that point, there was only one plane had hit one of the 
buildings and the other one was still intact. So we 
went out to the other side in Manhattan. We went 
across 34 Street to Tenth Avenue. We went down Tenth 
Avenue and we took Broadway, West Broadway down to the 
World Trade Center. 

We were stopped at West Broadway and Vesey by 
one of the Lieutenants there, he told us to bring our 
vehicles around to where everybody was staging. 
Instead the staging of the vehicles took place at 
Washington and Vesey. 

At that point is when Carlos took his gear 
and said well, I'm going to go ahead and go to triage 
while you park the vehicle. We didn't know -- it 
looked serious, but we didn't know it was so 



R. ABRIL 

traumatic. 

I parked my vehicle. I asked the Lieutenant 
if I should leave the keys. He told me no, just to 
stay by the vehicle, but there were plenty of people 
pulling me aside to help them out. I remember a lot of 
leg fractures and extremity fractures. I found myself 
triaging people. Many of the Metro Care ambulances 
were sent away with patients, but I mean, when the 
Lieutenant disappeared, there was nobody else at the 
triage where they had parked all the vehicles. There 
was nobody else there. 

The initial collapse, not the actual 
collapse, but the top part of the building collapsed on 
top of these firemen and cops on West Broadway and 
Vesey as I was walking towards the building. I was 
unable to make it any more, because there was a lot of 
dust . 

We witnessed a lot of stuff. We witnessed 
people falling off the buildings. We witnessed a lot 
of firemen dying from the initial collapse. You know, 
all this time Lillo was trying to get to me. He got on 
the TAC two channel on the radios. He told me that he 
was on West Broadway in the middle, between World -- I 
think it was 6 World Trade Center and the north tower. 



R. ABRIL 

That's when he told me to come over and meet 
him, so what I did was I went around 6 World Trade 
Center to try and meet him and at that point is when 
the north tower collapsed and I couldn't make it there 
any more. 

On the way back, again, a lot of people were 
pulling at me, telling me to help them and I got some 
of these people in the ambulance. I kind of drove up a 
couple of blocks, I think it was Warren Street, I see 
it now. I think it was Warren Street, where I stopped 
and let them out and then I went back trying to look 
for my partner, but I found myself picking up more 
people and putting them again on Warren Street. 

Then I went back a third time. Then I found 
myself stuck treating an old lady that was in a 
wheelchair with her daughter I think it was. I tried 
to -- wheel her back to the ambulance. On the way back 
to the ambulance, I met up with a couple of other 
paramedics that they said they were from the Bronx. We 
were trying to -- it was all chaos. We didn't know 
what to do, where to go, so between the three of us, we 
kind of got together and tried to get some of these 
people out. 

Finally again, put some of the patients in 



R. ABRIL 

this ambulance. I think it was when the south tower 
collapsed is when we took our last set of people, but 
it was some of the parking police department, those 
people that give out the tickets. The last three that 
I took out with these paramedics and we took them out 
to, I think it was Canal Street or one of those 
streets, about 10 blocks away from the actual site. 

I went back, but at that point I couldn't go 
back any more, because it was too much dust. It was a 
lot of smoke and actually there was a lot of people 
that needed help. I couldn't go back. 

My main concern was to get my partner. I 
couldn't find him. I kept saying if anybody saw him, 
but I guess everybody was busy. 

Q. Did you happen to find out where Carlos' last 
location was where he was operating at? 

A. Physically I didn't go. I couldn't get there 
because of what I just said. But he told me it was 
between the building that we initially saw. He told me 
between the two buildings, come into the north tower, 
and that's what I was trying to do. So I figure he was 
between the 6 World Trade Center and the north tower. 
Somewhere around there. 

Like I said, there was 3 collapses. The 



R. ABRIL 



first one that the top of the building collapsed. I 
see here is the northeast plaza building. That 
building collapsed first. 

Q. That was the south tower? 

A. Yes, that would make it the south tower, 
yes. So the top of that building collapsed. Like I 
said, I witnessed 5 people got killed there. Then it 
was too much dust. That's when I think I saw Captain 
Rivera there too. I asked him if he had seen my 
partner and he said listen, I'm going to go back in 
there. 

Q. Who was that, Captain Rivera? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Joseph Rivera? 

A. Yes, JR. 

Q. Okay, JR, fine. 

A. I told him listen, I'm missing my partner. 
We got separated for some reason and I need to go 
back. I need to find him. He says don't worry about 
it. I'm going to go back in. You take care of these 
people and I will go back in and find him. He did. He 
went back in. That was about it. 

When we were -- they didn't let us go to 
Citywide. They told to us stay on Queens west. The 



R. ABRIL 

reason how I know that is because there was a lot of 
traffic and I remember in all the chaos, I wanted to 
make sense of why people were still going to Rikers 
Island. Why are people still going to minor injuries 
when we need a lot of help here. 

I remember listening to the radio, to all the 
normal traffic that you would have, when I know these 
people would need help. When the initial collapse 
happened, all my masks ran out. I had like 20 of those 
-- I think they are class A or class one masks that we 
always carry. But I gave them out and as soon as - - 5 
minutes they were all gone. I remember keeping, I said 
listen, I got only two left. I had one for myself and 
one for my partner. I can't gave give them away any 
more. Then I remember getting on the radio and saying 
listen, can somebody bring some masks, because I need a 
lot of masks over here. 

That was about it. When I turned around and 
I tried to help these people before the north tower 
collapsed, the first big collapse, we were helping 
-- we were at, I think the American Express building. 
We had people that were burnt. We had people that had 
fractures and other people with psychological type of 
problems. We had staged them there, because there was 



R. ABRIL 

really no control over anything at that point. That's 
when the north tower collapsed. It was when I heard 
Mayday, Mayday. Some of the firemen that were running 
back were telling us run, run, run. We started to run 
and now that I think about it, some of these people 
with fractured limbs, they kind of took off running. 

That's it. Then after that, we just started 
to drive and we started to treat these people and I 
lost my partner. That was it. 

Q. Is there anything else that you would like to 
add or that you can think of? 

A. About the whole thing? 

Q. Yes. Personal stuff. 

A. At that point, what I didn't understand was 
why is it that we were triaging people on the first 
floor of this building that has a plane on top. I 
couldn't understand that. When I had a chance to walk 
in to see what was going on, there were actually close 
to 5 DOAs on the street. Some of them had no legs, 
some of them that had no arms. There was a torso with 
one leg, with an EMS jacket on top. I guess somebody 
wanted to just cover it. There was a fireman that had 
been hit by a body. I really didn't understand why is 
it that we were triaging people on the first floor 



10 

R. ABRIL 



instead of going somewhere else. 

What else did we do? Then after that 
everything came down and we were away from the dust 
cloud and everything, we were somewhere around, I think 
it was West 23 Street, somewhere around there. You 
could still smell the dust and smoke and we just wanted 
to come back. We kept going back, but at one point it 
was useless because most of the people that could get 
out were already walking back and there wasn't too many 
people other than the regular hysterical people, there 
was no really injuries. 

Other than -- maybe we treated a couple of 
eyes injuries, cops that were coming out. There was 
one cop that was actually crying blood. There was 
blood dripping down from his eyes and later I found 
out, the doctor explained to me that when you get 
concrete in your eyes it becomes rock and when you 
close your eyes, your cornea, your eye is bleeding. So 
I guess -- we just flushed the eyes and they kept 
going. 

That's pretty much it. 

MR. MURAD: Paramedic Abril, I would like to 
thank you for this interview. The time now is 015 
hours. This concludes this interview. Thank you 
very much. 



File No. 9110464 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

EMT KEVIN BARRETT 

Interview Date: January 17, 2002 



Transcribed by Elisabeth F. Nason 



K . BARRETT 

MR. MURAD: Today's date is January 17, 

2002. The time is 0700 hours. My name is Murray 

Murad of the Fire Department of the City of New 

York. I'm conducting an interview with the 

following individual. 

Q. Please state your name? 

A. KEVIN BARRETT, shield number 1465. 

Q. Your rank? 

A. EMT. 

Q. What is your assigned command? 

A. Battalion 49. 

Q. Okay. The location of the interview is being 
conducted at Battalion 49, Astoria. This is regarding 
the events of September 11, 2001. Can you just give us 
what happened that day in your own words? 

A. Sure. Came into work, you know. It was a 
typical day, so it was my wife's birthday. I was going 
to, you know, I was talking to my partner, deciding 
what I was going to do for her. Take her out to dinner 
and stuff like that. Did our little routine, got 
breakfast, reading the papers and approximately about 
9:15, we were told to go to the 59 Street Bridge and 
stand by and wait for further instructions. 

We were told to switch to Citywide and upon 



K . BARRETT 

listening to Citywide, they came over and confirmed a 
1040 at the World Trade Center. 1040 is an airplane 
crash. We were sitting there waiting for instructions, 
sitting there with Lieutenant Scaringello and other 
units that were told to stand by the bridge and 
approximately about 9:20, 9:25, we were told to respond 
in to the World Trade Center and stand by at Vesey and 
West Street. 

Upon hearing that we responded in. We 
followed another unit and we followed ESU truck 4 
straight down into Manhattan to the World Trade 
Center . 

Upon listening to Citywide we were told, 
being we were a HAZMAT unit, we were told to go to a 
different location. So upon arriving at the area, we 
told the Lieutenant, who was directing everybody, said 
we are a HAZMAT unit. He told us to make a right and 
to be honest with you, I don't remember what the street 
name was, even looking at the map, it was just so -- I 
was getting into what we had to do, my assignment. 

So we get there. I saw Captain Janice 
Olszewski. I told her we are a HAZMAT unit, you know. 
We are here, 49 Henry, and she said okay, you stand by 
with me. Have your partner get your truck ready and we 



K . BARRETT 

will use your ambulance as a supply truck if we need 
anything . 

Upon coming down, everything was going good, 
people being brought down to us, being triaged. I was 
working with the Captain, Lieutenant Bruce Medjek, and 
was trying to organize everything a little bit better. 
I ended up talking to Paramedic Carlos Lillo. He kept 
asking me where is my wife, have you seen my wife. 
Have you seen my wife. I said Carlos, don't worry, she 
is going to be okay. She is around. We will find 
her. Concentrate on doing what you got to do, do what 
we are here for. 

Upon that, a lot of civilians were coming and 
trying to answer their questions and the cops asked me 
do you have any fire line tape or anything that we can 
block the road off. I said yes, I have HAZMAT tape, so 
I got the HAZMAT tape out of my truck. I cordoned off 
the area. So the civilians, all the nosy people 
wouldn't come in and bother us so we could do our job. 

Approximately 9:50, we heard this loud 
noise. I looked up and it sounded like another 
airplane was coming in. That's what it sounded. It 
sounded like a large engine, like you're sitting on the 
seat on the wing of the plane. That's the best way I 



K . BARRETT 

can describe what it sounded like. 

We look up and we saw tower two coming down. 
We just all ran. I lost my partner. I lost everybody 
I was working with that day. Let me backtrack for a 
second. 

When we were putting up this HAZMAT tape, I 
turned around and I said to Carlos ' partner, Paramedic 
Abril, I said where is Carlos. I mean -- by that time 
Carlos was gone. We don't know where he went, but we 
think he went in to look for his wife. We don't know. 

Q. Do you know what tower -- was both towers 
still up or did he run -- do you know what tower he was 
heading towards? 

A. No. Both towers were still up when we were 

Q. At what point did you actually lose Carlos? 

A. I would say maybe roughly about 9:45. 
Somewhere around there. Just Bobby and I just turned 
around and he was gone. It was just -- I remember 
Bobby telling me he gave me his pager, because he has 
an alpha numeric pager and he said I will call you and 
let you know where I am. We never heard from him 
again . 

Then like I said, when tower two was coming 



K . BARRETT 

down, we just all scattered and a young lady was 
getting trampled on. I picked up her up and I said 
come on, let's go. We only got up around the corner. 
She went one way, I went another way. The last thing I 
remember is it started getting, gray, gray. It turned 
pitch black and I get up, I turn around, like I 
couldn't move. I figured out I was underneath a car. 

I got up and I was just -- got out from 
underneath the car and I realized I was underneath a 
police car, praying how lucky I was. 

Q. That's when the south tower came down? 

A. That's when tower two came down. 

Q. Which is, you are referring to -- 

A. I guess the south tower. 

Q. Okay, because the north tower is still up, 
right? 

A. Right. 

Q. It was the south tower that came down. Okay, 
go ahead. 

A. Then I got out. I got out from underneath 
the car. Made sure I was okay. I didn't see any blood 
or anything like that on me. There was two gentlemen 
behind me. I wanted to make sure they were okay. They 
were okay. I said okay. 



K . BARRETT 

We walked into a store and we just, you know, 
got some water, cleaned out some of the stuff out of 
our throats, because we were all just coughing and 
gagging and all the stuff that we inhaled and 
ingested. I asked to make sure they were okay. They 
were . 

We walked into the store and I just started 
looking at people to make sure everybody was okay. All 
of a sudden, I hear my name called out and I end up 
hooking up with my partner again, which was another 
miracle in itself, because we just ran. 



I got into the store and we just -- I saw my 
partner and I was like you are okay. He was okay. He 
wasn't hurt either. Then we were going to go back 
out. We went back out to check to make sure we were 
going to go back down to the area, make sure everybody 
was okay, see what we could do and that's when the 



K . BARRETT 

north tower started coming down. 

We ran again. By the time we ran, we just 
got -- I don't know where we were, what we were doing. 
We just kept running. After the north tower came down, 
we were able to find EMT Moussa Diaz, another one of 
our co-workers out of our station. The three of us 
just hugged each other. It was like a miracle that we 
all survived that. It was just something I will never 
ever forget as long as I live. I was unable to get in 
touch with my wife, let her know I was alive, get in 
touch with my parents, anybody. My cellphone was 
dead. Couldn't make calls out because the towers -- 
the lines were down. 

Finally at about say one o'clock my 
mother-n-law was able to get in touch with my 
cellphone. I told her call my wife, call my mom. Let 
her know I'm okay, I'm alive. I don't know what time 
I'm coming home at all. I was able to get in touch 
with my wife about 6:00 that night at my house to let 
her know I was okay, you know. 

It was just a beautiful day turned into a 
disaster. I felt like I was in a movie at first, when 
you see everything, you know, typical movie. You would 
see a movie and everything is like a storm and a 



K . BARRETT 

tornado and everything just turns gray and pitch black 

and I'm in the middle of this. It was like I thought 

it was a dream and then it was reality. 

Q. All right. Is there anything else you would 

like to add to the interview? 

A. No. Just that I'm lucky to be here to talk 

about it. 

MR. MURAD: Okay. EMT Barrett, I would like 
to thank you for allowing us to give this 
interview. The time now is 709 hours. This 
concludes the interview. Thank you. 



File No. 9110465 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

EMT MOUSSA DIAZ 

Interview Date: January 17, 2002 



Transcribed by Elisabeth F. Nason 



M. DIAZ 

MR. MURAD: Today's date is January 17, 
2002. The time is 545 hours. My name is Murray 
MURAD of the Fire Department of the City of New 
York. 

Q. I'm conducting an interview with -- 
A. MOUSSA DIAZ, EMT, 3203 for the New York City 
Fire Department, EMS. 

Q. This interview is being conducted at 
Battalion 49, Astoria station. This is regarding the 
events of September 11, 2001. EMT DIAZ, just give us 
your perspective on what occurred that day. 

A. What happened was we had a job, pregnant 
complications, so I called for back up medics 49 
Victor, Tour 2. We brought the patient over to 
Elmhurst Hospital. Upon getting our ACR signed, Carlos 
Lillo came running over and told us a plane just hit 
the tower, you know, let's come up available as soon as 
possible and head down there. 

Got on the radio, we got in the ambulance and 
got on the radio, and we told them we were going to be 
responding, so we followed 9 Victor en route to the 
tower from Elmhurst Hospital in Queens. 
Q. Keep going. 
A. Elmhurst Hospital in Queens. From there, we 



M. DIAZ 

drove down to the Midtown Tunnel. Took the Midtown 
Tunnel. Our destination was Barclay and Vesey. From 
there me and my partner -- 9 Victor went their way. Me 
and my partner went towards 1 World Trade Center, where 
the command post was. 

Q. What was your partner's name, who were you 
working with that day? 

A. Paul Adams, shield number 2212. We were 
directed to go to either Barclay and Vesey, right 
across the street from the 1 World Trade Center. 
That's where we met Captain -- I don't know her name. 
We had our first patient that had about 70 percent 
degree burns. We assessed her. We transported her to 
St. Vinny's. We came back from St. Vinny's, back to 
the same location. The Captain had told me there is a 
lady with a cardiac condition, so we sat her down on 
the stretcher. 

All of a sudden we heard a big boom and I 
looked up and the tower started to collapse, so I 
instructed the patient, I told her make a run for it. 
From then we all ran. I lost my partner and a big 
black cloud of debris started coming around the corner 
from, I believe it ' s 5 World Trade Center. 

Q. When you said you heard a boom, what tower -- 



M. DIAZ 

can you describe which tower -- 

A. I believe it was tower one, because we were 
right in front of it. Right between, there is a 
street. There is like a path. We were against the 
building. 5 World Trade Center. I believe that was 
what it was, and 1 World Trade Center. It was directly 
above it and that's where the command post was. 

When we heard the big boom, I looked up and I 
just saw the building collapsing. My patient was on 
the stretcher and I unstrapped her and I said make a 
run for it. We ran around the corner. Everybody just 
started trampling. I fell on the floor, and that's 
when a ball of dust started coming in between the 
blocks of buildings and my visibility was gone for a 
while. I ran into a pole, couldn't breathe and a 
cameraman, a guy had a camera I couldn't see and all I 
saw was a bobbing light. I ran over to the cameraman 
and he grabbed me and we started feeling for -- things 
-- things seem, you know -- we were losing air, trying 
to feel somewhere where we can get in and trying to 
open car doors and then we felt for a city bus. We 
opened up the door, went in, I was looking for buttons 
to turn it on. We turned this bus on and we started 
taking people inside the bus to get a little refuge, 



M. DIAZ 

because there was no visibility. 

From there, I thanked him for saving my life 
and stepped off the bus. Everybody else stepped off 
and we started running. Then another cloud came. We 
had some visibility and I had some sense of direction 
where I'm running towards. I ran towards -- I believe 
it was Federal Plaza. By the courts. I took refuge 
there here, by the Federal Building, the US Post 
Office. We ran up towards this way. We took refuge 
there. I got the fire hydrant that was open and I got 
some water to clear my face and stuff. We had like a 
little command post. People running up to me. I was 
by myself and asked me what should I do. I just had 
them sit down, because there was asthmatics, there was 
pregnant people, nothing really major. 

From there, I went back because my partner 
was gone. I went back, I walked back and I walked back 
down West towards the location of the command post, but 
it was impossible because there was no visibility 
towards that area. That's when I saw EMT Barrett 
running out and EMT Monchery running out. They were 
from my Battalion. They were all dusted up and we 
just, you know, started hugging each other and stuff. 

From there, I believe one of them had a 



M. DIAZ 

radio, because I lost my equipment and everything. We 
heard that people needed help down at - - I think it was 
down Broadway and -- I'm not too sure. Couple of 
blocks over. 

We went there and there was an ambulance. 
The Captain that was in charge of the command area was 
there and an ambulance. I don't know the people's 
names. We drove to a corner, because there was 
somebody in distress like two blocks down. It was just 
a guy that was in our situation, but he was stable and 
started to go on his way. 

From there, they drove me to the West Side 
Highway to get checked out. I got triaged over there, 
mini triage, and I stayed there until the duration, 
until 1 in the morning basically. 

The rest of the people from Battalion 49 that 
were there, we all went under the ambulances and we 
went down back to the station. 

Q. Just a couple of questions. Actually, so you 
were there when the north tower collapsed. Was the 
south tower down already? 

A. No, I was there -- I don't know which the 
first tower that went down. 

Q. You were there for the first -- so that was 



M. DIAZ 

the south tower that came down? 

A. Probably, yes. 

Q. Then you were there for the north tower, 
also, collapse? 

A. Yes, I was there. 

Q. Radio, did you have any radio communications? 

A. I lost my radio when I got tr -- because when 
I was on the stretcher, I had the patient on the 
stretcher. I unstrapped her and I told her run. I 
unstrapped her and I told her to run and the people 
just started trampling on you. My helmet was gone 
because I didn't have it strapped on tight enough. My 
radio, my equipment that was on the scene was gone. My 
ambulance was parked a block and a half away and if I 
would have went there I wouldn't have made it. If I 
would have went towards the ambulance I definitely 
would have -- I was about a block and a half way away 
from -- 

Q. Is there anything else that you would like to 
add at this time? 

A. Not at all. 

MR. MURAD: Time now is 0600 hours. This 

concludes the interview. I would like to thank 

EMT DIAZ for this interview. Thank you. 



File No. 9110470 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

EMT JOHN HEER 

Interview Date: January 18, 2002 



Transcribed by Elisabeth F. Nason 



J. HEER 

MR. DUN: Today is January 18, 2002. The 

time now is 8 o'clock. My name is Richard Dun. 

I'm working for the New York City Fire 

Department. I'm conducting an interview with the 

following individual. 

Q. Please state your name. 

A. John Heer, I'm an EMT, Battalion 22, Staten 
Island. 

Q. Okay. On September 11 can you just in your 
own words describe what happened on that day? 

A. From around -- we left the station around 
8:40. Around 8:45, we started getting calls, I started 
heading over towards the Verrazano Bridge for staging. 
They wouldn't send the job over, so we started heading 
down there, wondering what it was. 

Before we got to the Verrazano Bridge, they 
said to set up the staging on the Brooklyn side of the 
Verrazano Bridge. Before we got over to the Brooklyn 
side of the bridge, they said they changed staging also 
to the opening at the Battery Tunnel. At this time I 
got a cellphone call from my wife telling me a plane 
hit the towers . 

So I started trying to fix the PD radio, so 
we could listen to PD, see what was going on over 



J. HEER 

there, because I told them we were going in and we knew 
we were gonna be in the Battery Tunnel at that time, me 
and my partner John Rothman. By the time we got to 
-- we were just about to head into the tunnel, saw the 
smoke coming out of the one tower. I was looking down 
playing with the radio. I looked up and saw another 
explosion come out of the second tower. I didn't 
actually see the second plane hit. That's when we went 
down into the tunnel . 

We came out the other side. We were on, 
what's that, West Street, and we were directed to make 
a right. We pushed right up into staging up on West 
and Liberty, where you actually felt the heat from the 
building. There was a bunch of crushed cars, bunches 
of just other stuff laying around on the street. Cops 
directing people, in and around. We stood there for a 
little while so I could grab some equipment, stand out, 
I was like the first -- 

Q. Was there a lot of debris falling still at 
that time? 

A. Yes, we should not have been there. We knew 
we should not have been there, but there was some 
Lieutenant, Captain, whoever was there, telling 
everybody to hang out, that's where we are setting up 



J. HEER 

staging. Line up the units. Fine, so we stood there. 
That was like one time I grabbed the helmet and 
actually stuck it on. There was stuff. You heard it. 
I don't know if you remember as a kid you used to melt 
Army soldiers and they go ssst-pop. You hear that 
sound. That's what was coming off the building. 

So after, I don't know, 10, 15 minutes, I 
don't remember the time, somebody said to us, you know, 
we really should not be here, you know, this is 
actually bad. There is stuff falling all over the -- 
Q. Was that an officer? 

A. This is a Lieutenant. Lieutenant or Captain. 
It was an EMS Fire Department officer, yes. But he was 
definitely EMS. He said we should -- he was in a 
little bit of a panic, which is understandable. So we 
moved down around by South End. We moved up Liberty 
Street to South End. Just went around the corner and 
parked the bus there. This time we opened up the bus, 
we figured let's get the stretchers set up, and 
basically throw all we could on the stretcher. Long 
board, pulled the stretcher out and left it there. 

There was a liquor store over there. The guy 
says anything you guys need, come inside, use the 
phone, the bathroom while this is all going on. I 



J. HEER 

thought -- and the guy in the deli next door to him 
says look, can I close yet. I want to go home. I was 
like, well, do whatever you want to do, I don't care. 
So this time we started watching people jumping out of 
the building. My partner counted about 20. I saw 
maybe like 5 or 6, something like that. Still the same 
thing. Watching stuff hit the ground. Trying to 
listen to the radio. 

Another unit pulled up. Some guy pulled up 
to us. He had a cut on his head, so a private unit 
gave him to us. Says here, we're gonna transfer him to 
you, or he can sit in my bus and do nothing if you want 
to. I'm not going anywhere right now for a while. 
Hatzolah was pulled in front of us. They had a lady 
having an anxiety attack, so we took our guy with the 
scratch on his head, and told them to take him too 
-- because our plan initially was let's go in and grab 
some patients and get out of there, because this is 
going to be nuts . So I wound up doing the right thing 
for some strange reason. That's -- I guess when we 
just started hearing the tower come down. 

Q. Did you see any EMS officers that you 
recognized at the scene? 

A. No, there was nobody there I recognized 



J. HEER 

whatsoever. We were around a bunch of, as I said, 
there was -- Hatzolah was there, there was some other 
privates. There were a few EMS officers. Nobody I 
knew. At one point a Firefighter came over to us, 
asked us for a sheet to cover up a body part that was 
on the street. I'm sure he had -- that was before the 
tower came down, so -- and that's bad. 

Q. The tower was still up though? 

A. The tower was still up. You could see when 
we were around the corner you could see the top of the 
south tower. You could see the top. It just starts -- 
you hear the crumbling, like an engine roar and 
something started coming down like that and people just 
started scattering up the corner. People just started 
coming up to us panicking and stuff, so we put them 
in. We didn't start putting people into the liquor 
store where the guy wanted us. We started putting 
everybody into the deli where the guy didn't want us. 
He wanted to close up. But he was really nice once we 
all got inside. So we started pushing people in there, 
grabbing anybody, because the cloud started coming, 
standing by the door. This time I dropped my radio. 

Q. Was there good communication on the radio -- 

A. It was anarchy on the radio. I'm sorry. We 



J. HEER 

started hearing stuff -- the first time I ever really 
heard somebody screaming Mayday, which was for real. 
Everybody started screaming Mayday, Mayday, over and 
over again. I just was trying to hold the radio while 
we were running over the building, putting people in. 
You couldn't hear anything because people were 
screaming at us. So we are pushing them in the deli. 
I dropped the radio. Ran in, you know, it's taboo to 
lose a radio. 

So anyway I ran back outside to get the radio 
while my partner starts screaming at me. Forget that. 
Went back inside. I think the deli guy was pretty much 
anything you guys want? We are trying to push people 
in the back, through the door. All this time, all you 
can see out of the window, it was just black. 
Everything was pitch black so we started -- we are 
going to get trapped in here. We are not getting out, 
we didn't know what was going on. Pushed people to the 
back of the store. My partner started saying like, 
there is no way out of here. I just like started 
telling him there is always a way of out of these 
places. They have to have by law some back entrance. 

That's when we got everybody settled to the 
back where the cold cut racks was and stuff like that. 



J. HEER 

It still was completely black and some lady came out 
from the back door and said there is a hotel out back 
and there are people trapped up there. Me and John 
Rothman were the only ones in uniform that looked like 
anybody. Everybody else was civilians, so everyone is 
coming up to us and at this point we thought we were 
dead. We weren't getting out of there. I have kids, 
so I wasn't going to sit and die sitting in the deli. 

I went in to the other building, went in 
through some back door and was went up some stairs and 
started screaming at the, you know, see if there's 
people. Started hearing some little voices in the 
background and stuff. So I was with John, and once 
again, he started screaming you opening those freaking 
doors? You don't know what's in there, feel the 
handle. That's kinda something you learn on TV. 

So it was a family, a few families, all 
cuddled in a corner on, like on the second story. They 
said it was a hotel, I have no idea what it was. They 
were lying there. I was like you know, come on down 
this way. We got a deli down here, you can get water, 
whatever you need. We are all going to hang out down 
there and see what's going on. So I pulled them down. 
I guess there was -- because, I guess, I don't know, 



J. HEER 

between 8 or 12 of them. I really don't remember. 

That's when I found a back door that -- 
thinking there is a way out. So I pull the door open 
because (inaudible) and see it was just the cloud came 
back in so I slammed that door shut. 

By this time out front, it started clearing 
up a little bit so we realized we were not blocked and 
we can actually get out. It was -- so some Lieutenant 
or somebody. I don't know who it was. I don't 
remember. I knew it was an officer, said we was going 
to start putting people down in the basement. I'm like 

Q . EMS ? 

A. FDNY I think. So we're gonna start putting 
people in the basement. I said everybody get off the 
floor, we are going to the basement for safety, because 
we didn't know what was going on. We didn't know if 
another plane was going to hit, if a bomb was going 
off. Some people go down. Other people are like look, 
I'm not going to the basement. I said look, I don't 
care. If you don't really want to go in there I'm not 
gonna tie you down and pull you down there. I have 
enough stuff to do here. 

Went outside. It was like that, a snow 



10 
J. HEER 



storm. It was like muffled -- it was a muffled kind of 
-- like when the snow is really heavy and you are just 
seeing shapes moving out there, hearing Scott packs. 
This is where I split up with my partner, John Rothman, 
for a while. 

Actually, before I split, sorry, I'm jumping 
the story here a little bit. He gave me a potholder 
with citrus seltzer water on it, because that's all 
that was in the deli. Hold this over your face, so we 
could breathe. 

Went outside. John Rothman says, hey, I 
found Chief Grant. So it was like all right. Where is 
he. He says walking around, he's a little AMS right 
now. He is over in the other deli. There was another 
deli down the street a little bit. Here I grabbed the 
0-2 pack and went down and hooked him up to some 0-2. 
So I'm saying to Chief Grant -- I really don't know him 
because I just transferred out of here. He says you 
know, are you all right. He is like just staring with 
a glazed look in his eyes, which is understandable. 

Once again, my partner, John Rothman, takes 
off out of this store to look around for something. 
Chief Grant takes the non-rebreather and unhooks it 
from the 0-2 tank. Just walks out with a 



11 

J. HEER 



non-rebreather on his face. He was like all right, he 
is all right. He is going to walk around a little bit, 
fine. Go walk around. I packed up my stuff. I 
started to find John. I said let's get the unit and 
get out of here. You know, it was moving down the 
street. I don't know how far we can go. You can't see 
anything down here. I don't want to start running over 
people . 

So the truck is obviously covered with all 
kinds of crap and the stretcher and everything was 
out. I told him let's throw the stretcher in, you 
don't know if we'll need it. We threw the stretcher 
back in the bus, closed the doors up. This time the 
Lieutenant, I think he said Lieutenant, I don't know 
his name. This is the same guy before that told us 
-- we told him we were going to move around. We tell 
him we are heading down here. So, you know, we told 
him get in the bus, we are going to drive down the 
street . 

We winded up getting in the bus -- 

Q. Is this still before the second collapse? 

A. This is before the second collapse. We drove 
up to Albany Street, which is the next street, made a 
right, went heading down towards the water where there 



12 
J. HEER 



is like a little circle statue or something there. We 
hung out there. We got out, this time some guy came up 
to us, his radius-ulna was broke. We splinted it up. 
Let's get out of here, but we did the fastest splint 
job possible, and I said look, don't move your arm too 
much. He was a security guard or something. We wasn't 
a uniform status. There was some kind of uniform he 
had on. So I said don't move too much. Let's get out 
of here. 

By this time, jumping ahead a little bit. We 
went down, left the bus there, turned it off. Went 
down to the water, made a left. Started heading down 
towards Battery Park. That's where everybody was 
going, because the cloud was all coming up from this 
way. We are still kind of getting some air so you 
could breathe, because you couldn't breathe. We got 
down to a certain point. There were boats pulling up. 

Actually before the boats pulled up, sorry, 
there was a Chinese restaurant or something there, and 
somebody opened the door and there was about a 4 foot 
wall there that was -- I don't know how you are 
supposed to get into this restaurant, because that's 
the way we climbed over the wall and we started looking 
over and there were some firefighters, started pulling 



13 
J. HEER 



them up, because they were down by us. Families, 
little kids and stuff like that. Little kids started 
asking me, you know, why is this happening. I was like 
I don't know, I don't know what to tell you. You be 
with your family. It wasn't even her family. It was 
some guy was just, people were helping her out. 

Pulled them all into this restaurant. That's 
when some boats started pulling up along, I don't know 
what pier that is over there. I have no -- 

Q. Glen Cove? 

A. No, we were down here, all the way towards 
this plaza, then there is something up here, over here 

Q. The Waterway piers? 

A. Oh, okay. There were wood rafters. Boats 
pulled up there and they hacked open the gates with 
axes. So we started loading more people. Told them, 
just get on a boat and get the hell out of here. We 
didn't know what was going on here. We are going do 
get hit again. 

Before we even got into the Chinese 
restaurant, that's when the second tower started coming 
down. That's why I say, my story jumps around a little 
bit. 



14 
J. HEER 



But the second tower, which is actually the 
first tower, tower one came down. We just heard a 
rumble and the smoke started coming around and people 
started running. I was like I wonder what they are 
running for, I can't even see anything any more, and so 
they took off. I slowed down by old ladies and stuff. 
You feel bad, you are racing and running past like 70 
year-old ladies walking with canes. I said, you can't 
do that. As I said, we didn't think we were making it 
out anyway so we just ended up doing the right thing. 

Started loading people on to the boats . We 
had another officer with a broken tib-fib fracture or 
something. She was splinted up with cardboard or 
something like that. We carried her over to the boat 
with -- I don't know if it was Hatzolah or some other 
private units. They are like are you getting on the 
boat with her. I'm like no, but if you guys want to 
go, go ahead, so the privates hopped on with her and 
they got out of there. Because I didn't even know 
where my partner was, again. He was not there again. 

By this time, another 15 or so minutes, my 
cellphone started working again for a split second, you 
know, you heard that happen. Called my wife. She was 
like is everything all right. Yes. So she decided 



15 
J. HEER 



this was the time 



We started packing up, some -- I don't 
remember what Captain it was. His face is familiar. 
I'm really bad with names and he was around on a golf 
cart over there. He said, look, we're bugging out of 
here. We are moving out. We are heading down to the 
Battery Tunnel. I'm sorry, not Battery Tunnel, Battery 
Park. They are setting up staging over there. I'm 
like cool. So I said, yo, John, there's nothing for us 
to do over here. You can't see anything. There is 
nothing going back up there, because you couldn't see 
anything . 

So we're gonna start heading back down 
there. We are like, all right. We will do that. 
Let's go around and see if we can get the unit. We go 
back around up -- we walked back up to get the unit, 
because we were useless, just walking around, when all 
our equipment and everything is up there. This time 
all our windows were busted out. All our equipment was 
gone. All of our personal shit was gone, except for 
actually this mug, because I had to save my sci-fi 
coffee mug. So I'm walking around with this coffee 



16 
J. HEER 



mug . 

We get down to Battery Tunnel. I start 
walking down there -- and a de-fib. I had this mug and 
the de-fib. We came to a clearing, there was like a 
clearing, and there was a Lieutenant there. Once again 
I don't know the names. John would probably know who 
he was. He always does. The Lieutenant saw us walking 
down, he starts running up to us. 



|. He ran up to 
said are you guys all right. He grabbed our equipment 
and carried it for us. I thought that was the coolest 
thing that you could do at that time. 

He gave us some water and we hung out over by 
a rail for I don't know how long. Then we just started 
listening to the radio, Coast Guard coming up. There 
are jets flying overhead now. Every sound you hear, 
everybody is panicking and running everywhere. 

Q. Both buildings are down? 

A. Both buildings are down. If anybody 
screamed, or anybody ran in a little hurry in any 
direction, everybody was just following them. It 
didn't matter what was going on. Long story short, I 



17 
J. HEER 



guess. Finally get to the ferry. 
Q. South Ferry now? 

A. Yes, South Ferry. Not much really in 
between, pretty much hanging out, talking about stuff. 
Trying to get a sense of humor about the situation. 
Some people already moving around in those little 
carts . 

We went out for long boards for a little bit, 
to -- the only place that had long boards at that time 
was Bellevue. A bunch of their own employees were just 
sitting there staring at us, and we're like, to hell 
with that. We are going over there. So we took a 
bunch of long boards. Headed back downtown. Hung out 
there for a while. Listened to the President's 
address. You know, that was really inspiring. 
Somebody put it over the PA system, one of the bosses. 

After a long story, we finally said it's 11 
o'clock at night, we're heading back to the Island, 
we're not really doing anything. It's only some 
walking wounded. Got to Staten Island, we didn't know 
how we were getting back to the station, so a bunch of 
firefighters, actually rescue 5, there was 2 
firefighters. They were the only two that survived, 
were on the boat with us and we were all really quiet. 



J. HEER 

It was a morbid ferry ride back. 

We hopped on a train. I didn't know where 
else to go. We hopped on a train. We got off at New 
Dorp. We called them up, called the station for 
somebody to pick us up. At this time I didn't know 
what was going on in the outside world besides what was 
going on in Manhattan. They were like yeah, we will 
send somebody down to New Dorp to pick you up. Get off 
the train there at New Dorp. All right. We get off 
the train. Nobody shows up. We call them, they are 
like oh yes, we are still waiting for somebody to show 
up. I'm like fine. 

Then one car pops by. He says you guys need 
a ride anywhere. I didn't realize we are all covered 
in this shit still. Some little kids are asking us all 
about this. It's what you see on TV. That's pretty 
much what it is. That's the extent what was going on. 
Another car pulled up, so we're like no, no, we are 
still waiting for a ride. Finally, the third, fourth 
car pulls up and asks us let me drive you anywhere you 
guys want. My family is here. Giving us their story. 
They wanted to hear -- there was nothing really to tell 
them. 

Anyway some gentleman did pick us up in a 4 



19 
J. HEER 



by 4. Drove us back to the station here. Then I left, 
home ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^| 



and turned on the TV and that was the first time I saw 
it all. It's screwed up. That's about it. 

MR. DUN: This concludes the interview with 
John. It is 8:15 a.m. Thank you very much. 



File No. 911047? 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

PARAMEDIC PHILLIP ASHBY 

Interview Date: January 22, 2002 



Transcribed by Elisabeth F. Nason 



P. ASHBY 

MR. McCOURT: Today's date is January 22, 
2002. My name is Tom McCourt from the New York 
City Fire Department. Currently I'm interviewing 
Paramedic Phillip Ashby from Division 1. 
Q. Can you just identify yourself please? 
A. Paramedic Phillip Ashby, Division 1. 
Medication coordinator. 

Q. Paramedic Ashby, can you tell me the events 
that transpired from your perspective on September 11, 
2001? 

A. Okay. At approximately -- it appears to be 
between 814 hours and 830 hours I responded from Queens 
to lower Manhattan for a plane into the World Trade 
Center. I got there -- 

Q. Who were you working with? 

A. Myself. I parked my vehicle on what appears 
to be from this map, Broadway between Dey Street and 
Fulton Street. I ran down Fulton Street, where I 
immediately met the -- what I think was the first 
triage staging area for that operation. 

I met the now Captain Olszewski, Lieutenant 
D'Avila. Who else was there? Bill Melarango, 
Lieutenant Bill Melarango, and a number of EMS 
personnel. We were doing triage in that area, in front 



P. ASHBY 

of the Millennium Hotel, actually at the corner of 
Fulton and Church. 

We were doing triage, treating a number of 
patients. It's hard to count now, maybe, I guess 
probably say altogether maybe 40, 50 patients. Just 
triaging . 

Q. What were you seeing? 

A. Seeing a lot of burns, couple of sucking 
chest wounds. Just mostly burns, multiple burns. At 
that time I really didn't see anybody jumping out the 
building, although I heard people that have seen that. 
I didn't see any, because I was too busy working. I 
was looking up actually, because there was nothing for 
me in front of me to see when I looked up. 

While there I couldn't quantify the time, to 
tell you exactly how long, but I heard a large scream. 
Then I heard a couple more screams simultaneously. 

Q. People screaming? 

A. People screaming, and I just ran. I didn't 
look around. I didn't -- I just ran because you have 
been around these buildings as long as I have, you 
recognize a real screams from a fake scream and you 
realize something that if somebody is screaming that 
hard, it's something coming out of the lower abdomen 



P. ASHBY 

that you just can't fake. It's just scared to death. 
I just took off. 

Q. Which way did you run? 

A. I ran up Fulton Street, stayed close to what 
would be considered the south side if you will, on the 
right-hand side of Fulton Street, if you are going east 
on the right-hand side of Fulton Street, next to the 
Millennium. That's when I turned around and I saw the 
building collapsing. 

Q. You saw it collapsing? 

A. Right. Well, about 3 strides until I run I 
actually turned around to see what I was actually 
running from after the fact. Not trying to get -- 
stop, making sure that I wasn't running from nothing at 
all, that I was running from something. I looked up 
and I saw the building lean over and that's all I saw. 
I just turned back around and tried to run even faster, 
but I stopped because where I was running to, the plume 
of smoke had already engulfed Broadway going north. 

Q. So you were running into it or -- 

A. I was running towards Broadway, but it made 
no sense because it's like a wave, like water going 
down a canyon. That plume of smoke was just already 
coming down Broadway. I just, you know, said just -- I 



P. ASHBY 

stopped. I looked and I said that wouldn't make much 
sense. I'm going to run into what I'm trying to run 
from. I turned around and the plume of smoke just as 
high as this building was, coming at me from the corner 
of Church and Fulton. 

Q. Behind you? 

A. Right, just coming around the corner of 
Church and Fulton. So I just -- I tried to run into 
the building. To the right I think was a bank or 
something, right on the corner there. I'm not too 
sure. But the doors were locked, so I really tried to 
go to the left a bit. By that time it got so dark and 
I was so overcome by the soot and the pulverized rock, 
that I just laid next to the subway station, which 
would be right here. Right there is the subway 
station . 

Q. Where is that, indicate it? 

A. On Fulton and in the middle of -- about a 
third of the way up Fulton if you are coming from 
Church on the left-hand side. 

Q. Heading towards Broadway? 

A. Heading towards Broadway. I stopped by the 
subway station. Not wanting to go down in the train 
station, because I realized that if I was going to die, 



P. ASHBY 

I wanted to die above ground as opposed to being 
trapped and suffering and knowing that I was going to 
die anyway. I wanted it to be quick. I didn't want to 
go down to the subway station and wait to die down 
there, because I really did think that I was going to 
die. There was no two ways about it. I couldn't see 
anything . 

About two or three minutes of sucking in what 
I would consider to be -- when you think about, it 
would be something like throwing in your mouth powder 
and just trying to breathe as somebody throws powder in 
your mouth. That's essentially what it felt like to 
me. I mean there was no way you can salivate enough to 
get rid of it. It just kept on coming down. 

Q. Was there anybody with you or you were all by 
yourself? 

A. By myself. By myself. 

Q. No other civilians around -- 

A. No. As I'm laying there ready to die, I 
can't see anything now because of my eyes -- somebody 
pulled me and they pulled me up. I guess someone just 
came out of the Millennium Hotel or even the bank 
across the street and he is feeling his way, but he is 
in a better position than I was, obviously, because he 



P. ASHBY 

was not in the initial plume of smoke. He pulled me up 
on to Broadway and right between -- on Broadway between 
Ann and Fulton Street. Right (inaudible) or something 
like that over there on the corner. He pulled me into 
there . 

That's when I was able to get some water and 
dust myself off and all that good stuff and really just 
consider myself fortunate. Just hacking up the dust 
for like an hour, two hours later -- I mean, you know, 
soot the color of this table here, which is cherry oak, 
cherry wood, for like an hour and a half. Actually 
more the color of that. More the color of that. A 
cross between these two. But whatever pulverized rock 
looks like, you know, I was coughing it up for about an 
hour and a half. 

Q. Was there any debris field there also or was 
it just all of the soot and the dust and everything? 
Was there actual building material that came down? 

A. By me, no. Well, let's put it like this. If 
there was I couldn't see it. I don't know if there was 
or there wasn't. But if there was I couldn't see it. 
All I know is that that was the only thing that was in 
my lungs. I know that I was limping after the fact, 
but the reason I was limping was not because anything 



P. ASHBY 

hit me, because I pushed off so hard on my right leg, 
that, you know, I almost fractured the thing. That's 
what I think. I mean I have heard stories about -- 
fear is something else. It really makes you really do. 

Q. Fight or flight. 

A. Exactly, and you don't really examine it so 
much as -- I pushed up so hard on my right leg that 
there is no doubt which leg that I had left the scene 
with. It was just a very remarkable thing. That's it. 

Q. What happened at that point after that, did 
you go back to the -- 



P. ASHBY 

So I thought somebody launched a missile from 
the East River, or over the Hudson to knock it down. I 
mean that's what I'm thinking. If they are, if they 
are still out there to launch another missile, I got to 
get the hell out of there, because we were in a war 
zone right, exactly. I didn't think -- I didn't go and 
try to figure out my high school physics or my college 
chemistry to figure out, you know, the fire and the 
brick and the melting and the boiling point. 

Q. Going back to when you were coming, did you 
see the building on fire, could you see the state of 
the building while you were responding? 

A. Oh, yes. Oh, yes, it was something that was 
-- it was just -- (inaudible) . 

Q. You knew going in, you knew what you were 
going in for. 

A. Yes. I knew. Put it like this. I wish I 
knew what I was going into. I saw what was happening, 
but it didn't compare to what I was going into when I 
was there. You know, the devastation was just 
something that being on the job for 13 years and like I 
said, being in the last bombing and being in train 
disasters and everything disasters, nothing could 
compare to what happened that day. Nothing. Nothing. 



10 
P. ASHBY 



I hope nothing else, in my lifetime anyway, comes 
across like that either. 

Q. By the time of the second collapse, were you 
still there? 

A. By the time of the second collapse, I was at 
Pace. Right, I was at Pace. 

Q. Pace University? 

A. Pace University. I'm trying to get out of 
there again and as I'm trying to walk towards, not the 
Brooklyn Bridge, because I figured that would be 
another historic location for them to attack or launch 
a missile. I was trying to head towards the Manhattan 
Bridge and take my chances there. So I was at Pace and 
then -- actually I was walking towards the bridge when 
another building came down and I ran into Pace. 

Because by now, you know, you don't need 
anybody to tell you what is happening. You know either 
-- I don't know if the second building came down, but 
I knew something with the same magnitude happened as 
happened with the first building that I saw. I ran 
into Pace and, you know, people were crying and 
everything else. I was just trying to just suck wind. 
You know, I went into (inaudible) . 

I was just bent over and trying to -- where 



11 

P. ASHBY 



they keep the food warm, just trying to get at least 
some semblance of air into my lungs, which was already 
congested from all the soot. Just bend over with that 
refrigeration device under my nose, you know, because 
at that time I was just trying to get any kind of air I 
possibly can, because I knew that, you know, just from 
a physiology standpoint, everything was so thick with 
gook. They don't do lung transplants. So I kind of 
figured whatever I can do to help, it was on my own. 

When that scenario calmed down and a lot of 
the plume of smoke went away, I came out of Pace, 
again, still not knowing that the building collapsed, 
thinking that somebody launched a missile and trying to 
get out from -- and I came over the Manhattan Bridge 
and came back here -- 

Q. To MetroTech? 

A. MetroTech. Got treated at BHS . Then I went 
back, because that's the only way I felt that I could 
bring some kind of closure, because now I was fully 
briefed on what happened. 

Q. You knew what happened. 

A. I knew what happened. There was no doubt and 
I didn't think that going home would be the place for 
me to actually bring closure than coming back and 



12 
P. ASHBY 



actually helping with the rescue or whatever it is, 
anything that I could do, would somehow bring me, being 
able to talk to somebody who was actually there. Not 
somebody who wasn't there. That's not what helped me, 
because unless you were there, you just can't imagine 
it. 

That's what happened. I went back to the 
location. I spent another couple of hours late at 
night and then I went home. I came back the next day. 

Q. How is your leg? 

A. After three or four days it's fine. I mean I 
knew I was hurting. I figured, you know, listen, all 
in all there is nothing to complain about. Nothing to 
complain about. I'm walking. I stopped coughing up 
the soot that was in my lungs. Everything else is like 
I said, is a plus. I wasn't hanging out dangling. 

Q. Anything you want to add that you might have 
glanced over? 

A. Nothing. I mean the picture of me in 
Newsweek. There is a picture of me in Newsweek. 
That's it. A picture of me and Carlos. 

Q. Carlos? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Do you know where Carlos -- 



13 
P. ASHBY 



A. Didn't you see the picture? That's me 
bending over treating a woman. 

Q. You were with Carlos right before -- 

A. Well, that's what the picture said. Did I 
see Carlos and know Carlos ran into the building, I 
can't say any of those things. 

Q. You weren't focused -- 

A. Right, right. He wouldn't have to go into 
the building to have died in there. He could have died 
right there in that corner. It was not extraordinary 
to die. You can die right there in that corner. That 
picture, you know, placed him -- photographing the 
woman who I had taken off that chair. She just looked 
bad, and I put her on the curb, but she just looked 
bad. I mean she was not -- 

Q. Is she the one that was all bloodied up? 

A. Exactly. I saw a picture of her actually in 
Time Magazine on the curb where I put her. That's if 
she's alive. I don't know if she is even alive today. 

Q. You don't know her name? 

A. I don't know her name. All I knew is I took 
her off that chair, I put her on the curb because that 
chair needed some real work, because she was not as bad 
as she looked. She was frail. 



14 
P. ASHBY 



Q. Is that when you were doing the triage -- 

A. Right. Exactly right. That's where we were 
all doing the triage on that corner. Then I think 
Lois, who was a coordinator for Brooklyn, said that 
Ricardo Quinn's wife said that his hand was in that 
picture, because she recognized his bracelet. I don't 
know. She asked me did I see him, I said I don't 
know. I couldn't tell you who I saw. All I saw were 
the people screaming at me, which was Olszewski, 
because, you know, they were telling me that listen, 
you worry about patient care, you worry about triage. 
As a medic, you get involved in patient care, not 
triage. They ought to be giving you triage. 

That's what I was involved in. So that's 
about it. 

Q. Okay. Is that it? Anything else you want to 
add? 

A. That's it. 

MR. McCOURT: The time is 8:40. The 

interview started at 8:25. This concludes the 

interview. Thank you very much. 



File No. 9110479 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

EMT PETER ROSIE 

Interview Date: January 22, 2002 



Transcribed by Elisabeth F. Nason 



P. ROSIE 

MR. RADENBERG: Today is January 22, 2002. 

I'm Paul Radenberg, Fire Department World Trade 

Center tasks Task Force currently at EMS Battalion 

13. The time is now 13 hundred hours. 

Q. I'm conducting an interview with -- 

A. Peter Rosie, EMT, Battalion 13. 

Q. This interview is being conducted regarding 
the events of the morning of September 11, 2001. 
Peter, you can begin. 

A. My girlfriend woke me up and told me to turn 
on the TV. I live on Second Avenue and 9 Street. I 
saw that one of the towers was on fire, so I went up to 
my roof. Figured I would just get in the way, didn't 
want to go, you know. Then I saw the second bird hit, 
so then I knew I better get busy. Threw on my uniform, 
jumped on my son's bike and went directly to Bellevue. 
I was there like in 3 minutes. 

They threw a radio at me and I was on 06 Ida 
with a partner. I didn't know the guy. Jagoda. His 
name is Jagoda. 

We took off directly from there and headed 
down Second Avenue. I remember passing my apartment. 
Got on to Canal and then shot down Broadway and ended 
up at City Hall Park. That's when we had patients 



P. ROSIE 

coming towards us. I had no idea that the tower had 
came down at that time. I thought the debris and 
everything that I saw, you know, was from the fire. So 
I didn't have any visual of the tower coming down, but 
apparently it was coming down, because we got there at 
around 10 o'clock. 

Then with all those patients coming at us, I 
was trying to triage like 5 people at the same time. 3 
police officers, two female officers, I didn't know 
what was wrong with them. They were pretty 
hysterical. A male police officer with a cardiac 
condition and a male with his arm badly lacerated. He 
was bleeding pretty bad. 

So I patched him up and there was a couple of 
other units there. We volunteered to take these 
patients on and I'm trying to see - - so I get them on 
the bus, you know, and start giving 02 to the cardiac 
condition. Everyone was pretty hysterical and I didn't 
get the story because I heard collapse, but I would 
never imagine that the whole tower came down. I just 
figured well, things had -- obviously -- would fall 
from the tower and that's how this guy got this trauma 
to his arm and he was going into shock. I tried to 
calm down the police officers as best as I can. 



P. ROSIE 

One of the female police officers just jumped 
on the stretcher, so I was holding on to the guy with 
the -- he was my main concern. He had the cardiac 
condition. I gave him 02. There wasn't much I could 
do other than that, take his blood pressure and monitor 
him, but I was concerned with this guy's arm, because 
it was barely attached. 

So we shot to Bellevue and when they opened 
up the doors to Bellevue, just an army of people in 
scrubs. They were just terrific, you know, grabbing 
people left and right, triaging them, sending them to 
their respective areas. Went back to the station, 
hosed down the bus because it was a mess with the 
debris and BBP, as best as we could, restocked 02 and 
then shot back down. 

Then I believe we got to Church Street and 
during this time -- I mean I have thought about it, you 
know, during this time, when we first -- that first 
time, when the first -- when the tower went down, I had 
no idea and we were off the site before I got any 
details, so I figured the second tower had collapsed as 
we were returning back to Bellevue with this person 
-- load of patients. 

Then the second tower had collapsed by the 



P. ROSIE 

time we arrived at Church Street and Barclay. I 
remember, because I believe this is World Trade Center 
7. This is tower 7 here? 

Q. That's the Post Office. 7 is - - yes. 

A. 7. So it was right here, Barclay. There was 
much more debris. 

Q. Barclay and West? 

A. Barclay and West, yes. It was just dead 
quiet. At that time there was pretty much -- out of 
control was -- everyone was just trying to get their 
bearings at that time, you know. So the Lieutenants I 
did run into, he tried to get everyone around and take 
names. That's the best thing we would could do is just 
get a good idea of who you had with you right there. 
But then we had -- there was an individual 
down there who seemed like he was just like wandering 
around and so I went and got him and he just -- he was 
out of it. He had breathed in a lot of the dust and -- 
I guess he was an EMT, but he was kind of like on his 
own type of thing. He had his kit bag, you know, and 
his badge, but more or less, you know, he got out of 
there. He was pretty much out of it. 

Q. That was down by Vesey? 

A. Vesey and West. So we transported him. We 



P. ROSIE 

transported him to Beth Israel. Hosed down the bus 
again and made our way back to tower 7. We were here, 
then we were on this street. What is this? We were on 
Murray Street and -- 

Q. Let me get my other map. 

A. Greenwich. Murray Street and Greenwich. 
Murray Street and Greenwich. The World Trade Center 7 
had collapsed at that point. I can remember asking, 
because we had visuals before we left and then I had 
asked somebody, who was it, is it going to collapse and 
they said probably tomorrow. But on our return it had 
gone down too. 

At that point we made our way to the staging 
area, you know, and became the -- what do you call us, 
we were the unit next to the -- what is the trailer 
where they take -- 

Q. The MERV? 

A. The MERV. We were the hot something. 

Q. Okay. The hot unit. 

A. The hot unit, right. We were just 
transporting firemen back and forth all day. That was 
it. 

Q. Okay. When you got up to the Bellevue 
station, do you remember about what time you got there? 



P. ROSIE 



A. You mean the first time? 

Q. Yes, yes. You left your apartment and went 
to Bellevue. 

A. I was at Bellevue at 9:40. 

Q. Okay. When you came down over by City Hall 
Park, you had said that there were some other units 
there? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Do you remember -- 

A. I believe. 

Q. -- who they were? 

A. I believe it was a Presbyterian unit. 

Q. Cornell? 

A. That's it, and a Hatzolah unit. 

Q. Okay. The fellow with the arm injury, he was 
a civilian? 

A. Yes. I actually got his picture in Time 
magazine. Not Time, but People magazine. It was 
funny, because I went to Barnes and Noble. I don't 
mean to get off track here, but it was pretty amazing 
to see my picture in there and the guy who I 
transported. If anything, during that - - if I think I 
made a difference, it was maybe that first run, you 
know. I'm sure I made a difference all day, but that 



P. ROSIE 

guy, he was pretty beat up. 

Q. So from City Hall Park you went back up to 
Bellevue? 

A. Bellevue. 

Q. You came back on the next trip, your next 
trip in, and you were on like West and Barclay? 

A. West and Barclay and then we were -- West and 
Barclay and we might have -- West and Barclay, not 
Barclay. Sorry. I was wrong. That's too close, 
because this was up in flames. Okay. So it was Murray 
Street. 

Q. Murray Street? 

A. Murray and Barclay. No. Murray and -- what 
was this again? 

Q. This is Greenwich. 

A. Murray and Greenwich, and from there everyone 
was trying to get their bearings, trying to figure 
out. At this point we didn't know where the staging 
area was, the main staging area. 

Q. Right. The EMT that you were talking about 
that was by himself with the tech bag, was he a Fire 
Department employee? 

A. No, I believe he was private, because he had 
that type of private badge, you know, the blue, the 



P. ROSIE 

fancy blue one, looks like a detective. He just had a 
bag full of collars and I wouldn't take him for city. 

Q. When you got up here -- 

A. Oh, when I got here, then I ran into my 
partner Jason Charles. I believe you are going to have 
an interview with him. 

Q. Yes. 

A. I looked and I saw a fireman and -- but it 
was Jason wearing a fireman's jacket. Have you spoken 
with him? 

Q. I haven't. 

A. I saw him and I was really happy to see him, 
you know. 

Q. He is on our list. 

A. Yes, I saw him. He has quite a story to 
tell. I saw him and he gave me some aspirin, because 
breathing all this stuff I got a pounding headache, you 
know. 

Q. Do you remember who else was down in this 
area of Greenwich and Murray from EMS or the Fire 
Department? 

A. A Lieutenant Murphy. 

Q. EMS Lieutenant? 

A. Yes. Lieutenant Murphy. 



10 

P. ROSIE 



Q. Would you know where he is stationed or ever 
see him before? 

A. No, no. I remember his name, because later 
on that night, it must have been 2:30, he grabbed me 
and he said that he had 8 New Jersey busses, bright 
shiny busses from New Jersey. We are in the staging 
area and he wants them at Battalion 4. You know, with 
the lights and the road block and all this shit that's 
going on, I'm like okay, let me get my partner. He is 
driving. No -- forget it, you take them. So like, I 
remember, what is your name sir? Because here I'm with 
8 busses and I've got to get them to Battalion 4. 

I mean I live down there, but getting through 
this maze. So I was pretty stressed out by then, 
because I'm thinking I'm responsible for all these. 
I'm on my own in this bus and to get them to 4. Please 
let me find -- I was looking for Canal. Not Canal, 
Houston. I found Houston. I knew what to do from 
there and I got those busses at 4. I'm like here you 
go, thank you. 

Now what do I do. Do I go back to Bellevue. 
Do I go back to the staging area and try to find my 
partner. So I said shit, just go back to where I came 
from. Just getting back was a bit of a challenge, you 



11 

P. ROSIE 



know. On my own I think, like I'm listening to the 
radio and trying to get the big picture of what really 
occurred. It was weird because I didn't really have 
the full story, you know what I mean. 

I got back and I found him. Once again we 
were -- then for the rest of the night we were there. 
I'm glad I got my partner back, because he would have 
wondered where the hell is my partner. He would have 
been stuck down there. I'm just glad that I was given 
that task and I completed the task and I got back and I 
found my partner and that was good. 

I know you are more interested about what the 
occurrences at around 11 o'clock. So, sorry. 

Q. No problem. No problem. Aside from 
Lieutenant Murphy, when you say your partner, you are 
talking about Jagoda? 

A. Jagoda. He is Battalion 8. He is Bellevue. 

Q. Anybody else down in that area that you 
remember seeing? 

A. Around 11 o'clock? 

Q. Yes. Well, when you were back here at 
Greenwich and Murray? 

A. No. 

Q. He was the only one? 



12 
P. ROSIE 



A. He was the only one. 

Q. How about? 

A. Jason Charles is the only one that I 
recognized and that was -- I don't know what time that 
was. That was like on my third return back from 
transporting. I saw him you know. I couldn't give you 
any names. Really there wasn't that many EMS, you 
know. Hatzolah. I saw a couple of Hatzolah units and 
a New York Cornell, but I didn't see much Fire 
Department EMS. 

I think because -- I believe there were 
mainly a lot more around the staging area, weren't 
there? You probably have a lot more knowledge than I 
do. 

Q. Yes. 

A. Compared to -- because we came in from this 
direction, at a fairly late period, you know. I 
think. So much I'm sure had gone on before all this 
from the time that the first bird hit and people were 
trying to get organized and here we are whizzing down 
just before it collapses, you know, from this 
direction. Didn't see much activity here, you know. 
Except for the Hatzolah and the Cornell. 

Then it was so good to get to the staging 



13 
P. ROSIE 



area eventually and see more EMS and ambulance -- 
what's going on. 

Q. Right, right. 

A. I was like, I was trying to do ACRs on all 
these people, do you know what I mean? I was like 
damn. There was -- you couldn't talk on the radio. 

Q. The radios were down or just too much? 

A. Too much traffic. I figured and I'm sure my 
partner figured, if you don't have anything really 
important to say, don't say it. 

Q. Okay. Anything from that morning that sticks 
in your head particularly or any comment you would like 
to add? 

A. On a personal note? 

Q. Yes. 

A. Well, I was in the British Army for six years 
and I had two tours in northern Ireland. I had been 
familiar with explosions going on in Belfast. I was an 
NCO. It was weird because I thought I had left all 
that behind me. That was something that kind of no one 
knows about. There is no way you could really explain 
it to anyone unless you were actually there, you know. 

Then this -- it's really horrifying over 
there, because it's not that big and it's more 



14 
P. ROSIE 



intimate. There is a lot more to deal with. There is 
a lot more you can deal with compared to something like 
this. Then for this shit to happen, it was like kind 
of odd like -- I think I was a little bit more -- I was 
prepared. I was pretty focused. I stayed focused. 

But it was strange because I was still not 
really awake. I jumped on my son's bike and got on 
that unit. Here's your partner. Here's your radio. 
Boom. We are going down and it was weird because we 
had such a clear avenue of approach. The police were 
just waving us on and we were shooting down there and 
seeing everyone come the opposite direction, so it was 
very surreal. It was like what's going on. It was 
like let's get there you know. 

It was actually a good feeling, you know, 
that traffic control was so good. That people were 
being -- people were leaving the area and we did have a 
good avenue of approach. We were able to get there at 
a good speed. So it was good. We got there and I'm 
sure that first load of people, the police officers and 
the guy were happy to see us. I was just pretty proud 
of everyone you know. 

So that's it. 

MR. RADENBERG: Okay. Time is now 1320 

hours. The interview is concluded. 



File No. 9110480 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

EMT MELVIN RODRIGUEZ 

Interview Date: January 22, 2002 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



M. RODRIGUEZ 2 

MR. ECCLESTON: Today's date is January 
22nd, 2002. The time is 2212 hours. This 
is Christopher Eccleston of the New York 
City Fire Department, World Trade Center 
Task Force. I am conducting an interview 
with the following individual. 

Please state your name, title, shield 
number and assigned command area of the Fire 
Department of the City of New York. 

EMT RODRIGUEZ: My name is Melvin 
Rodriguez. My badge number is 2267. I'm an 
EMT for the Fire Department, and my unit was 
15 David tour 2 that day. 

Q. Melvin, were you assigned to the World 
Trade Center disaster on 9/11? 
A. Yes , I was . 

Q. In your own words could you please tell 
me the details of the day? 

A. The details of the day were I was 
supposed to go home at 7. Somebody banged in 
sick. I had to work overtime. I worked the unit 
called 15 David. We had a job. We took somebody 
to Our Lady of Mercy. I noticed there was 
something wrong when I got to the hospital and 



M. RODRIGUEZ 3 

there was nobody in the emergency room, because 
everybody was in front of the TVs in the 
emergency room outside in the lobby. 

Somebody in the emergency room said 
your lieutenant, Angel Avila wants to speak to 
you. I picked up the phone, and he says, "What 
the heck are you doing? I need you -- you've got 
to be 63 to the World Trade Center. A plane hit 
the World Trade Center." 

So we got our patient signed for by the 
nurse, and we went down to the Henry Hudson 
Parkway and went all the way down to Manhattan. 
Q. When you were driving on the parkway, 
could you see the Trade Center at all? 

A. I wasn't driving; my partner was 
driving. I was teching that day. As we pulled 
up to Manhattan, they told us to switch to the 
Manhattan frequency because we were on citywide. 
As we pulled up, we heard a lot of screaming on 
the radio. Somebody was calling, "Mayday! 
Mayday! The first one just went down." 

We were down by Stuyvesant High School. 
There was a lot of dust. Everybody was picking 
up injured people covered in white soot. We had 



M. RODRIGUEZ 4 

a fireman -- there was a walking wounded facility 
across the street by Stuyvesant High School and 
we had a fireman that was covered in soot, 
screaming. He opened his eyes and you couldn't 
even see his eyeballs because he was so covered 
in so much soot. We took him to the walking 
wounded. We rolled him up. There was a ramp 
there, an elevator. We took him up there. 

We went back down to our bus, and the 
lieutenants had us stay by Stuyvesant High 
School . 

Q. When you say "we," who are you 
referring to? Your partner for the day? 

A. My partner was Dwight Scott. 

Q. Dwight Scott? 

A. He was here in the 15th Battalion. 
Yes. That's his regular unit. 

Q. That's his regular unit? 

A. Yes. 

Q. When you arrived on the scene 
initially, can you just indicate on the map that 
I provided for you approximately where you parked 
your vehicle? 

A. We were on the west side. It might 



M. RODRIGUEZ 5 

have been Barclay or Murray. It was around 
there, by Vesey, pretty close there, or maybe 
Barclay might have been it. I'm not sure of the 
street. It might have been Barclay; Barclay, 
Murray or Vesey. It might have been -- I think 
it was Barclay, yes, because it was right by the 
Stuyvesant -- wherever the Stuyvesant High School 
is, it was across the street from the Stuyvesant 
High School. 

Q. Okay. Could you just indicate with a 
number 1 approximately where you think you parked 
the vehicle? 

A. I think I was parked around here. 

Q. Thank you. 

So now you arrived and this 
firefighter -- 

A. We arrived. We got this firefighter. 
We wheeled him upstairs. They had a gym up 
there. It wasn't Stuyvesant High School; it was 
on the other side of the West Side Highway. 

We took him up there, and other people 
in the medical role took care of him. We went 
back downstairs, and everybody was trying to use 
the phones to call home and say they were okay. 



M. RODRIGUEZ 6 

It was like a line there. All the phones were 
down. Communications were down. 

We had no idea it was two planes . We 
had no idea it was terrorism. There was no 
communication. We just knew there was one plane. 
There was still One World Trade Center building 
standing, and it was on fire. 

When we finished with the fireman, we 
were around Barclay or Murray. They might have 
made us move back. There was a gas scare. I 
don't remember the time frame, but everybody 
started saying keep your ambulances away from 
manhole covers and sewers. Somebody yelled, 
"Everybody run for lives. There's a gas main 
leak. There might be an explosion." 

I got separated from my partner because 
everybody was running. An ambulance went by with 
broken windows and the back doors open. I jumped 
in the back of that ambulance. We ended up going 
by the Chelsea Piers. 

I really don't remember if that was 
when the second one came down, because to be 
honest with you it was so chaotic. I just 
remember little bits and pieces of that day. I 



M. RODRIGUEZ 7 

don't remember everything in a sequence. 

I remember the second one coming down, 
and we just stood there in shock. We were like, 
oh, my God. Everybody said, oh, my God. We had 
no idea this was going to happen, because we 
didn't know there were two planes. Me and my 
partner didn't; I don't know about everybody 
else . 

There was no communications. I didn't 
find out there were two planes and this was a 
terrorist act until 18 hours later when I got 
home and I put the TV on and my wife -- because I 
called my wife as we pulled into the World Trade 
Center. I told her what happened. I love you, a 
plane hit -- she put the TV on, and then she 
found out it was two planes. After calling her, 
she saw the second one. She saw them coming 
down. So they thought I was killed. 

So when I got home, she was crying, and 
we hugged each other. I finally took a shower 
because I had all this white stuff over me. I 
put the TV on and I realized, oh, my God, this is 
terrorism. We're at war. I thought this was an 
accident . 



M. RODRIGUEZ 8 

There was no communications. Everybody 
was so busy running around. A lot of us didn't 
know what was going on. That's why they say, oh, 
they were stupid, nobody should have been there, 
they should have known. Nobody knew nothing. We 
were just busy trying to help people. I didn't 
know it was two planes. To be perfectly honest 
with you, we still would have helped them, 
because it's only natural to want to help people. 

That was the devastating thing about 
this. When the second one went down, we went in. 
You're expecting hundreds of people to be 
injured. You're going to help people. It was a 
dead silence. Everybody was dead. There was 
nothing but body parts all over the place. It 
was a helpless feeling. You're all pumped up to 
save the world, and there's nobody to be saved. 
Everybody's dead. 

That's really what the shocking part 
about all of this was. The dead silence, the 
helplessness, the frustration, even guilt of 
being a survivor. You knew when you saw that 
second one come down all those people and the 
firefighters and everybody was dying. You 



M. RODRIGUEZ 9 

couldn't do nothing. You were helpless. That's 
what really hits you. 

After the second one went down, they 
said there was an ambulance and the lieutenants 
were telling us not to go in. I remember telling 
my partner, "Listen, this is bullshit" -- excuse 
my language -- "We've got people in there 
trapped. We're going in there." 

So six guys. I said, "Anybody got any 
balls, get in the back of my bus." There was 
supposed to be an ambulance called 19 something, 
and nobody heard from them. They were supposed 
to be behind the apartments over there by Battery 
Park. 

So six guys jumped in my ambulance and 
said we're going in, we're going to call this 
operation our guys. We're going to get our guys 
out of there. We went in there, we found the 
ambulance, but there was nobody in the ambulance. 
Hopefully they got out. 

Then we came back. You wanted to do 
something, and you couldn't do nothing. 
Everybody was dead. It was just a helpless 
feeling. It was just a helpless feeling. 



M. RODRIGUEZ 



10 



I just kept on working overtime down 
there. I worked the morgue 18 hours my next pass 
day. In the beginning when you worked the 
morgue, it was a tent by the American Express 
building. We, the EMS people, we had to go 
through the body parts . 

You know, you get a body bag in and 
expect a body. There were no bodies. They were 
bags. We had to open up those red bags with our 
hands. Of course we had gloves on. And you had 
to go through those body parts, looking for 
anything to associate that remains with a member 
of the service, whether it was looking for a 
littleblue thread, a piece of equipment. I did 
that for 18 hours, you know, and it was rough. 

I remember the respect the coroner 
showed by ordering tables. They didn't want to 
be putting body parts on the floor, treating 
anybody with disrespect. That's something I 
remember, the respect they showed for the remains 
of all those people. 

It was just a horrible situation. I 
don't know how else to describe it. It's just 
been a horrible situation. 



M. RODRIGUEZ 



11 



M. RODRIGUEZ 



12 



Q. 
A. 



M. RODRIGUEZ 



13 



M. RODRIGUEZ 



14 



A. 



M. RODRIGUEZ 15 



It was just a horrible situation. I 
don't know how else to describe it. It was like 
living through hell. It was a sad, sad day. I 
don't know how else to describe it for you. 

Q. I think you've done a pretty good job. 
A. I thought I had seen a lot of horrible 
things in my life. In 13 years in the Bronx, 
I've seen the worst of everything as far as 
mutilizations , picking up body parts on a 
highway, 200 pieces, a guy run over by a 
tractor- trailer . 

But working at the morgue and picking 
up hands with wedding bands on them, knowing that 
they belonged to some loved one and picking up 
torsos, wallets with pictures of kids. Those 
were Americans, you know, decent people who died 
innocently. It was pretty tough. 

It's also brought the good out in 
people, and I think people are closer to God and 
people are -- I think we got too -- in this 
country we got too comfortable where we were so 
bored with our being -- having a balanced budget 
and living so good that we were so bored we 



M. RODRIGUEZ 16 

started fighting amongst each other: Your color 
is different than mine. Let me start with you. 
Or your religion is different. And this woke us 
up a little bit. 

People say we got caught with our pants 
down. We got caught without our pants even on. 
You know what I mean? 

I don't know how else to say it. It 
was just a horrible thing. But it brought a lot 
of good out of people. More people are going to 
Church now. I appreciate everything I have now, 
things I didn't appreciate: coming home and 
seeing my dogs in the yard and them licking me 
and seeing my five-year-old son. All the things 
I took for granted then I don't take for granted 
anymore . 

I don't know what else to say. I just 
hope all those people that passed away are happy 
in heaven and at peace with themselves. I don't 
know what else to say. 

Q. Is there anything else you would like 
to add to this interview in regards to 9/11 up 
till about maybe 2:00 in the afternoon? 

A. Up till 2:00 in the afternoon? It's 



M. RODRIGUEZ 17 

hard to get things in sequence because of the 
severity of the situation. It's like a horror 
movie you saw in, not slow motion, but fast 
speed. Your adrenaline was flowing. Sometimes 
bits and pieces come to you that you don't even 
remember. I'm like, oh, I remember that now, 
because your mind blocked out some of the things 
that were so horrible. 

I remember when I was a kid I used to 
get the paper with the little drops of candy and 
you would bite the candy. I remember in the 
morgue picking up a face, just a piece of skin 
with teeth on it like that. The things you saw 
down there were horrifying. 

Thank God now they don't have to do 
that. I remember the three people I worked with 
the first time I worked in the morgue, they had 
to be relieved. They couldn't take it. So I was 
there all by myself. I just tried to think these 
are families, people that were loved and they 
were good, decent people and somebody has to do 
this. If I could do it and show respect for 
their remains and treat them in a respectful way, 
I'm going to do it. That's the least I could do 



M. RODRIGUEZ 18 

for these people, besides pray for them. 

I remember the priest saying prayers 
over them before we even opened the bags. 
Everybody that died in the World Trade Center, 
their remains were treated with respect. They 
had a priest pray for them, for their last rites, 
for their souls, that they didn't suffer. 

And I think the families that don't 
know that should know that, that there was nobody 
who had a family member's remains treated 
disrespectfully, without prayer, without respect, 
and I think that's very important that the 
families should know. 

If I could do something, I would want 
that to be known, that the families know that we 
treated their family's remains as though they 
were our own families, from the coroners who 
ordered those metal beds so nobody would be put 
on the floor to the priest there that prayed over 
the remains . 

I think if there's one thing I could 
tell the people of New York is that their family 
members ' remains were treated with respect and 
dignity. Maybe that will bring them some solace 



M. RODRIGUEZ 19 

in this whole sad situation. 

That's all I can say. 
Q. I thank you very much for conducting 
this interview. 

MR. ECCLESTON: This interview is being 
concluded at 2230 hours. The counter on the 
cassette player is 484 



File No. 9110482 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

EMS LIEUTENANT NELSON VELAZQUEZ 

Interview Date: January 23, 2002 



Transcribed by Nancy Francis 



N. VELAZQUEZ 

MR. RADENBERG: Today is January 23rd, 2002. 
I'm Paul Radenberg of the Fire Department's World Trade 
Center Task Force currently at EMS Battalion 14. I am 
conducting an interview with Lieutenant -- 

LIEUTENANT VELAZQUEZ: Velzaquez, Nelson, 
from Battalion 14 in the Bronx, Shield No. 372. 

MR. RADENBERG: This interview is being 
conducted regarding the events of September 11th, 
2001. Interview start time will be 1308. 
Q. Lieutenant? 

A. On September the 10th, I worked the Tour 3, 
evening tour, in the Bronx. I proceeded to stay on for 
Tour 1, which is September the 11th, the night tour. I 
worked a double shift. Sometime around between 5:00 
and 6:00 o'clock in the morning, when I arrived home, 
this was probably about the time when I went to sleep, 
and during the morning of September the 11th, I thought 
I was dreaming when I was hearing sirens and a lot of 
noise and commotion. The location where I was sleeping 
at my girlfriend's house has a view of the West Side 
Highway and West End Avenue on the lower east side, 
62nd Street. My girlfriend turned on the News Channel 
1 and she woke me up and told me that an airplane just 
crashed into the World Trade Center. So when I woke 



N. VELAZQUEZ 

up, I looked out the window and I could see what looked 
like hundreds of fire, police and different types of 
emergency vehicles heading south. It looked like there 
was no other traffic on the highway or on West End 
Avenue going south. There was a lot of commotion on 
the street and this is far north of the actual event. 
So I immediately put on the same clothes I 
worked on the double and I ran downstairs and I got on 
my motorcycle and I went in my personal vehicle and I 
rode down to near Warren Street where there's a College 
of Insurance and that's where I parked my bike, in the 
middle of the block between West and Warren going -- I 
don't know the name of the street that's eastbound. 

Q. That's Greenwich. 

A. Greenwich, between Greenwich and West, and I 
started walking south on West when a cloud of smoke 
started to come in my direction. I believe the first 
building collapsed probably by the time I was parking 
my bike on Warren. As I started to go west -- I mean 
south on West, I started encountering a lot of people 
running in my direction. Some of the people I 
recognized as fire and police and mostly civilians. I 
noticed that the smoke started to settle and it was 
basically a stream of dust, and I remember grabbing one 



N. VELAZQUEZ 

EMS person and stopping her from running because she 
seemed kind of dazed and lost and I noticed there were 
vehicles in the cloud and I held her and I said, hey, 
it's already collapsed, you don't have to run anymore, 
and she was like frantic, like don't go over there. 
She was terrified. So there was an ambulance and a 
crew that was covered in dust and I just led her to 
them and they proceeded to deal with her, I guess. I 
told them to do anything just to keep her occupied, but 
I didn't want her to run any direction. 

As the cloud started to settle, I went south, 
and there was like an overpass, a pedestrian walk, 
close to a building that was on fire. Apparently from 
the time I left my house to the time I got down there 
and parked my bike, a second aircraft had crashed and 
the first building had collapsed. There were people 
everywhere. It was total chaos. There was equipment 
all over the place. Basically, there were units coming 
in from a lot of different directions, private and EMS, 
and what I was trying to do, I met up with -- I somehow 
found an EMT by the name of -- now I can't remember, 
from Jacobi, Battalion 20, Fuentes I believe his name 
was or Flores. I can't remember. 

Anyway, between me and this EMT and a couple 



N. VELAZQUEZ 

of vehicles, we tried to set up like a staging on West 
up against the sidewalk. Eventually, because of the 
dust, we had to move north about two blocks, and before 
we knew it I had about seven units and about twelve 
people. There were mismatch units, civilian, FDNY 
units. The communications was impossible. There was a 
lot of radio chatter and poor reception. So basically 
I had these units that we were already treating 
people. We didn't even get a chance to make ACRs . We 
must have treated about 30 people with respiratory 
problems and eye irritation. We tried to have them 
standing into the wind so that the wind could give them 
some fresh air. 

A few minutes after, then the next building 
came down. I didn't expect it to come down. It was a 
total shock. It was a very terrifying feeling. There 
were people crying, people were dazed. I didn't run 
when the second building fell because there were still 
too many people, and I didn't have any of the people 
move the vehicles because I was afraid they might run 
people over. So it's kind of stand fast, and the smoke 
and the dust came by like a wave, and then we started 
trying to regroup again. We stayed there for a couple 
of hours, we treated a few people, then we wound up 



N. VELAZQUEZ 

moving north into the gym of the -- I think it was the 
medical college or Bronx -- Borough of Manhattan 
Community College, the gym on the second floor, and we 
started treating patients, we put out the mats, we 
started trying to dust people off before they came into 
the building, and we were treating quite a few people 
there. I noticed there were a few Bronx units from 
Lincoln. I remember Mr. Perez. I remember seeing 
Burgos covered in ash. They assisted me for a few 
minutes. Then there was a call to evacuate the school 
gym because somebody said there may have been a gas 
leak. By then we were already set up with school 
security staff. We set up hoses to hose people down 
just before we had to evacuate the building and we 
moved about another block north. Most of the vehicles, 
including the MERV, I remember, were south of Vesey or 
near Vesey. 

During this chaos, there was a water truck, a 
Poland Springs water truck that was down there, and me 
and a couple people managed to go down there and take 
about ten bottles of water and we brought it to where 
we were at the staging we set up north of Warren, 
closer to the college gym, and we were irrigating 
people's eyes. Most of the people just wanted to 



N. VELAZQUEZ 

leave. A couple of units transported a few patients. 

We stayed there for a couple of hours, just 
gathering every unit that passed by me, I stopped them 
to see if they had a purpose or where they were going. 
Most of them didn't know where they were going. They 
were just coming in from all over the place. I held 
them for a while, monitored the radio, and they would 
ask for a unit. Apparently there was another staging 
southeast of me. I'm not exactly too sure. I think it 
was on Church. They were asking for units and I sent a 
few units in that direction. Once I saw that the units 
were not being utilized where I was, I sent them to the 
pier on, I believe it was 23rd Street Pier. 
Q. The Chelsea Piers? 

A. The Chelsea Piers seemed to be like an 
assembly area. So I sent quite a few units over there 
because they were not being utilized. But the period 
of time that we were at West Street near the college we 
had a treatment center and there was also a staging. 

After those units were sent north to the 
Chelsea Piers, I went south, where the command post 
was. Apparently I stayed there for a few hours 
assisting any way that I can. I believe there was a 
school, a public school they were using as maybe a 



N. VELAZQUEZ 

command post, and there were a few units there and I 
was directed to control those units and supervise them 
for a little while. It seemed like the sun was already 
starting to go down. I was supposed to go back to work 
at 1300 hours on the 11th for my Tour 3, which I never 
made. I wound up staying down in Manhattan for the 
rest of the tour until there were quite a few 
resources. I remember seeing a few chiefs. 

Anyway, then from there I went home and that 
was basically my tour. My evening tour I stayed down 
there instead of my battalion. 

Q. You parked your bike here on Warren, right, 
between West and Greenwich? 

A. Well, I can't see the name of the street on 
the map. 

Q. This is Greenwich. 

A. Yes. 

Q. And you said you had started coming down 
south on West? 

A. On West. 

Q. And you had said that you encountered the 
female EMT that was out of it -- 

A. Without a partner or a vehicle. 

Q. -- and another ambulance crew that you put 



N. VELAZQUEZ 



her over with them? 

A. Right. 

Q. Do you remember where that was? 

A. Roughly, I think it was near Barclay. 

Q. Down around Barclay? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Did you recognize the crew at all? 

A. I remember the female. I don't know her 
name, but I think she was from -- actually, I think she 
used to work in Jacobi. I think she works out of 
Bellevue now. 

Q. That was an EMS crew member? 

A. An EMS person. 

Q. You continued south, roughly this first 
covered bridge? 

A. Right where the bridge was. 

Q. Between 3 and 6 Trade Center? 

A. It looks like it's on the northbound side of 
West by 6 World Trade Center. 

Q. And that's where you tried to form up a 
staging area? 

A. Well, that's where I was encountering a few 
more people, but the scene wasn't safe. There was 
still a lot of smoke and dust and I believe these 



10 

N. VELAZQUEZ 



adjacent buildings were on fire and there was still a 
lot of emergency vehicles coming in these areas and 
they were sort of blocked in. So we went up towards 
Barclay. 

Q. So you were basically taking units that were 
already in this area -- 

A. They were coming from every direction. 

Q. -- and brought them back towards Barclay. 

Do you remember seeing any other EMS officers 
down there that you recognized? 

A. Not initially. After the second building 
collapsed, a while after, and before -- I'm not sure if 
it was -- was that 7 that collapsed, the third 
building? 

Q. I think so. That came down late. Well, not 
late, but like 5:00 o'clock in the evening the same 
day. 

A. Right. Well, I remember when that one came 
down, I was at the command post that was I guess 
between Vesey and Barclay and there were quite a few 
supervisors and chiefs and a lot of fire suppression 
personnel. But most of my activities were a little bit 
north of that command post because we had to move 
several times. 



11 

N. VELAZQUEZ 



Q. Anything else you'd like to add? 
A. No. 

MR. RADENBERG: Okay. Thank you. The time 
is now 1323 and the interview is concluded. 



File No. 9110483 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMT NAOMI NACIONAL 
Interview Date: January 23, 2002 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



N. NACIONAL 2 

MR. RADENBERG: Today is January 23rd, 
2002. I'm Paul Radenberg of the Fire 
Department's World Trade Center Task Force. 
I'm currently at EMS Battalion 14 in the 
Bronx, conducting an interview with -- 

EMT NACIONAL: Naomi Nacional, EMT 522 8 
shield. 

MR. RADENBERG: Naomi is currently 
assigned to EMS Battalion 14. This 
interview start time will be 1417 hours, 
regarding the events of September 11th, 
2001. 

Q. Naomi. 

A. I was outside Bronx Lebanon Hospital on 
the concourse when I heard on the radio station 
first before the announcement went over the radio 
saying that a plane crashed into the twin towers. 
At first I thought it was a joke because the 
radio station does a lot of things like that in 
the morning. My partner was like, "Oh, my God, 
listen to this, what happened." 

Before we knew it, we heard the 
announcement over the radio. In a few minutes 
they assigned us, which is very strange, I 



N. NACIONAL 3 

thought, because we were all the way in the 
Bronx, which is just kind of weird. We didn't 
hear them calling anyone else. 

They called our unit, 14 Charlie, and 
we started heading down there. I was working 
with Julio Marrero. We took Second Avenue all 
the way down. I remember driving towards there 
and I remember seeing all the smoke. As we got 
closer, I just see the towers, and it looked kind 
of scary and stuff. 

We actually got a call that was on a 
corner, not actually responding to the MCI. It 
was for a cardiac on the corner. I'm pretty sure 
it was something along the lines of Liberty and 
Trinity, that section over there. But we had a 
call. 

I remember when we got there there was 
just so much chaos and commotion. There was no 
way we can find a person with a cardiac condition 
on the corner. It was just impossible. So we 
tried to explain this to the dispatcher. Them 
not knowing what was going on, they were just 
telling us, well, then come back to the Bronx. 

We saw a lieutenant on the scene, and 



N. NACIONAL 4 

we pulled up to, I would say Vesey and West. It 
was not in front of the towers on the left side 
but somewhere adjacent to where you could look 
and you saw them right on top of you. 

We pulled up on the scene, and there 
were all kinds of people, fire trucks and 
everything. We saw the building on fire right 
above us. I stood in the bus, and the lieutenant 
on the scene was informing us where to go. 

My partner got out of the vehicle and 
was speaking to the lieutenant, and I was trying 
to speak to the dispatcher, because she was 
telling us to come back to the Bronx. I was 
telling her that the lieutenant on the scene was 
telling us to come out and help out. 

All of a sudden I heard this noise that 
was just horrible. I would say it sounded like a 
gate rattling or something like that. I look 
over at the people, and I go to look up. But I 
was sitting inside the ambulance, so not 
realizing that there's no way I could see. I saw 
nothing, but I heard it. Then I looked back, and 
I saw that almost everyone was gone. It was just 
like in a second I looked and no one was there. 



N. NACIONAL 5 

So I got out, and I started running, 
because everyone started running. That was when 
the second tower collapsed. It was right at the 
beginning of the second towers collapse. 

We were running, and I got completely 
separated from my partner. I didn't really know 
where to run. All of a sudden it was like a 
beige snowstorm. All these people were running 
and asking for help. I didn't know what to do. 
I didn't have any equipment. I didn't have a 
helmet. I had nothing. I remember that the 
stuff was burning my skin because I had short 
sleeves on because it was still warm then. 

I leaned up against the wall and I 
covered my head, and all the dust and debris 
engulfed everybody. This one guy, he was a big 
guy. He was about your size. He jumped on me 
for me to help him. I didn't know what to do. I 
think he broke his leg or something because his 
leg looked all weird. 

There was no way I could help him, 
because I'm not that big in comparison to him. 
For him to jump on me for me to try to try to 
carry him away from there was just not happening. 



N. NACIONAL 6 

I remember I fell to the ground because 
he jumped on me. I leaned against -- I felt for 
the wall, and I leaned against it. I couldn't 
see anything. I don't know why -- I don't know 
if it was psychological or anything, but I 
couldn't hear anything. I don't think that I was 
deaf, but I think I blocked out whatever it was 
and I couldn't hear anything. I was just 
trying -- I put my face in my shirt to try to 
breathe. It was too late. It was all covered 
up. 

Eventually it seemed like a long time, 
but I don't think it really was. I started 
realizing what was going on. It was just weird. 
I got up, and I was walking around and looking 
for anyone from -- any PD, any fire, fire guys, 
and I couldn't find anybody. I just found all 
regular civilians that were running to me. 

It was to the point that I was so 
nervous because I couldn't help them. I wanted 
to either take the shirt off or doing something, 
because they were just asking me what to do and I 
had no clue. 

I forgot really what happened. I know 



N. NACIONAL 7 

I was in a bank. Somehow I was in a bank. I 
found my partner there. I walked right up to 
him, and I tapped him on the shoulder and he was 
like, "Oh, my God, are you okay? What happened?" 
I was like, "I don't know." 

Then we were getting people into the 
bank. This woman was having an asthma attack, 
and we couldn't do nothing because we had no 
equipment. So I was basically just watching her 
really suffer. 

Then after that I don't know what 
happened. It was like a lot of gaps and 
whatever . 

I remember when the second tower came 
down, stuff kind of fell around me. I leaned 
against a wall, and there was stuff out here, to 
the right and to the left and in front of me. I 
stood in there for a while. When I came out, it 
was like -- I must have been really close to the 
towers. You didn't realize when you were running 
or when you were walking if you were going in the 
direction of the towers or away from it, because 
all you saw was -- it was a fog. 

What I'm thinking, I'm pretty sure I 



N. NACIONAL 8 

ran towards the towers instead of away from it, 
because I saw -- when that one collapsed, I saw 
less amount of people and more of the people I 
saw were people that were on the run, not really 
responding, or stuff like that. 

I got out of wherever I was in, and I 
saw -- when all the debris was flying through the 
streets, I saw this one guy and he was helping a 
whole bunch of people. He was in a CVS. I think 
that was two or three blocks away. I had run a 
distance. He was helping all these people. 



I thought it was kind of funny because 
I saw these firemen and cops running in there, 
and he was saving them. Some guy from the street 
that we underestimate, and here he is now like 
almost a hero, a regular guy. 

I was in the CVS. There was a whole 



N. NACIONAL 9 

bunch of cops in there and firemen in there. 
Eventually we got out of there. Somehow I was in 
a gym. I remember being in a gym where there 
were actual weights and stuff and people. 

I found this one kid that I knew 
from -- he was in Battalion 46. His name is 
Chris Londel . He is now I think in a photography 
unit in Metrotech from when I last heard of him. 
He helped me out a lot. He gave me his helmet. 
He looked after me. I never really knew him. 

I just saw him once, and we just 
recognized each other. It was like this unspoken 
thing that we just wanted to stay near each 
other, because we knew that we were or whatever. 

We went around trying to help out 
people. We took -- it was weird, stuff like 
bananas and tried giving them to people so they 
wouldn't get nervous. I don't know what we were 
thinking. It was kind of strange. I was 
sticking with him. 

I found this other guy. His name is 
Charles. I don't remember what his last name is. 
Or maybe that's his last name. I just remember 
Charles. He's from Battalion 16. I saw this 



N. NACIONAL 10 

other guy, Carlton Smith. He's from 46 or 50 or 
something like. 

It was just a crazy thing. I saw all 
the firemen, and they were all having this look 
on their face that they didn't even have to think 
about it. They just had to do whatever they 
thought was right and they didn't even know if it 
was right, just like complete look of doubt and 
belief at the same time. 

As far as the towers, I don't really 
remember looking at them after that because you 
couldn't see anything. I just remember when I 
actually did turn around it was kind of stupid to 
me. I kept thinking to myself I always see in 
horror movies the girl will be running and turn 
around. Why does she turn around? What is she 
looking at? Keep running. I turned around and 
looked, and I thought why did I do that? 

That's basically what I remember. 
Eventually I kept walking towards the highway, 
and I found a lieutenant. Supposedly she said 
that I was real out of it. It was just basically 
I was real tired. I wasn't hysterical or 
anything. I never really cried from the whole 



N. NACIONAL 11 

thing. Fortunately I didn't lose any immediate 
family members and so forth. 

Q. When they gave you the job for Liberty 
and Trinity, the cardiac, when you were coming -- 
when you were heading downtown, did you reach 
Liberty and Trinity? 

A. Yeah, we reached it at some point, and 
then we -- I don't know if we turned around, 
because all the streets were completely like -- 
you couldn't even tell. There was just private 
ambulances, all kinds of fire trucks. 

Q. Jammed up? 

A. Yeah. I remember being at the point 
and saying there's no way we can find anybody. 
There was just mobs and mobs and mobs of people. 
There was no way we were going to get out and 
look for somebody. It was obvious we had to 
either find a lieutenant and ask them what we 
should do or whatever. 

I remember being there. My partner was 
driving, so I don't know if he went down and 
turned around up Trinity and then made a left on 
Vesey, because I know that we weren't on the left 
side; I'm pretty sure that we weren't. I think 



N. NACIONAL 12 

that's what happened. 

Q. Was it at Liberty and Trinity that you 
found the lieutenant? 

A. No, it was somewhere around Vesey that 
we found the lieutenant. 

Q. Do you know who that was? 

A. No. 

Q. Do you remember any other EMS units 
that were with you at this spot there? 

A. Actually we didn't see many EMS units 
at all in the beginning. When I saw them was all 
after the buildings had collapsed and they came 
in. The beginning when we pulled up, I think I 
saw one. I don't remember what bus it is. From 
what I heard, I think only two ambulances were 
really destroyed, and I think one of them was the 
one I was in. 

Q. The unit you went down there? 

A. Yeah. It was bus 311. I don't 
remember any other buses that were there. I 
remember seeing one command car and one other 
ambulance . 

Q. So you were on roughly Vesey and West. 
West Side Highway or -- this is actually West 



N. NACIONAL 13 

Broadway. 

A. I'm pretty sure it was West Broadway. 

Q. West Broadway? 

A. Yeah, because I don't remember seeing 
the highway. You know what I mean? 

Q. Right, right. 

A. I just remember seeing more and more 
buildings . 

Q. So you were over here at Vesey and West 
Broadway when the first building collapsed? 

A. I think so. I'm pretty sure. 

Q. Do you remember roughly where you were 
when the second one collapsed? 

A. I don't think I was that far. 

Q. You were still in the area? 

A. Yeah. I think I was only maybe not 
that far at all, like maybe Church and Vesey, 
because I had run, run, run, and then I went back 
to look for my partner or whatever I was doing 
with people and stuff. I think I ran the other 
way. 

Q. Kind of back towards it? 

A. I think so, yeah. 

Q. Anything else you'd like to add? 



N. NACIONAL 14 

A. I don't know what else to say. I'm 
just really sorrowful for all the loss, and I'm 
sorry for all the firemen. I just remember like 
their faces and stuff. The reason why I have 
this job is because I wanted to be a fireman 
since I was a kid. It was just strange. I don't 
know. As far as the World Trade Center and stuff 
like that, I don't really know. 

Q. That's okay. No problem? 

MR. RADENBERG: The time is now 1432, 

and the interview is concluded. 



File No. 9110484 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

PARAMEDIC KAREN LAMANNA 

Interview Date: January 23, 2002 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



K . LAMANNA 2 

MR. RADENBERG: Today is January 23rd, 
2002. I'm Paul Radenberg of the Fire 
Department World Trade Center Task Force. 
The time is now 1448 hours. I am currently 
at EMS Battalion 14 conducting an interview 
with -- 

PARAMEDIC LAMANNA: Karen Lamanna, 
paramedic out of Battalion 14. 

MR. RADENBERG: And your shield number, 
please? 

PARAMEDIC LAMANNA: 1620. 
MR. RADENBERG: This interview is 
regarding the events of the morning of 
September 11th, 2001. 

Q. Karen, if you would give us when you 
were assigned to the job. 

A. In actuality I wasn't supposed to be 
working then. I was on overtime. I normally 
work 3 to 11. The day before I had signed up -- 
I had signed up for overtime originally on tour 1 
the day of the 11th or the day of the 12th. But 
an opening came up for tour 2 in the morning, so 
I decided I'd take that. I like working tour 2. 
Anyway, I wasn't supposed to be here. I would 



K . LAMANNA 3 

have been home. 

Anyway, I came in. I got here about 
7:00 in the morning. I was told at that time I 
was supposed to be riding a paramedic unit, but 
one of the paramedics didn't make it in. So they 
decided they were going to put me on a BLS unit, 
an EMT bus, 14 Mary in lieu of 14 Young, which 
was my normal unit, which is what I would have 
been normally working. 

So I worked with Freddie Burgos and 
myself. We went into service, checked our 
vehicle. We went around the corner for a quick 
cup of coffee. We had just finished that, 
literally, and we were heading to our area. We 
got called on the radio, "14 Mary, switch over to 
citywide. We'll be sending you a standby." 
Okay. That was nondescript as much as possible. 

The job came over. It came over as a 
possible explosion -- I think it was a possible 
explosion. Anyway, MCI at the Empire State 
Building. That's how we got the job originally. 
So we immediately switched over to citywide, told 
them we were 63, which is en route for the job, 
and off we went, flying like crazy to get there 



K . LAMANNA 4 

because we knew that it was going to be something 
major it was going to be the Empire State 
Building . 

While en route, before going over the 
Third Avenue Bridge, I was listening to the mate 
chitchat going on over the radio, the 12th and 
whatever else was being given. I looked at my 
partner and I said to him, "You know, this 
doesn't sound like the Empire State Building; 
this sounds more like the World Trade Center." 
Sure enough, 30 seconds later when the job comes 
over it's the World Trade Center. 

At that point they thought possibly a 
small plane had hit the World Trade Center. They 
didn't know what tower at that point, or at least 
we didn't know what tower at that point where we 
were. So we went, oh, boy, that's going to be 
something major. 

So anyway, we continued on. We headed 
down the FDR Drive. About halfway down the FDR 
Drive -- the traffic was getting very heavy. 
Everything was being shut down. About halfway 
down, all of a sudden we heard screaming over the 
radio, "Oh, my God, oh, my God, there's another 



K . LAMANNA 5 

explosion, there's another plane." My partner 
and I looked at each other and went, "Oh, my God, 
we're in trouble now." 

We continued down the FDR, and we got 
to the point where about a half a mile before the 
Brooklyn Bridge exit we were stuck in major 
traffic trying to get through. We were able 
finally to see the towers. All we saw was a lot 
of thick smoke, some flames. 

We looked at each other and said this 
can't be happening. We felt like it was in a 
dream, that it was totally surreal. I'm like, 
okay, time to wake up now. Time to wake up. 
Needless to say, we weren't dreaming; we were 
awake . 

Trying to fight our way through the 
traffic, with the help of the Police Department 
and all, we managed to get off the exit there for 
the Brooklyn Bridge, but we went down through the 
side streets . 

I said to my partner, "I'm familiar 
with Manhattan somewhat, but when you get down 
onto the little streets like in the Wall Street 
area, it's like a maze." He said, "No, I pretty 



K . LAMANNA 6 

much have an idea where going, " because we were 
looking for the staging area, which at that point 
one of the staging areas was listed as Liberty 
and West, if I'm not mistaken. So that's where 
we were going to go. 

We zigzagged along and went through all 
kinds of streets. Along the way a couple times 
we got flagged down, the people that were injured 
and had already made it away from the trade 
towers. But at that point there were so many 
private ambulances and volunteers and everything 
else that we decided, look, they can handle 
whatever comes their way right now. We need to 
get to the staging area. We're always told to go 
to the staging area. So there we went. 

So we futzed around. We got lost a 
little bit here and there. Finally we saw an AMR 
ambulance, and he was zipping along. It looked 
like he knew exactly where he was going. We said 
let's follow him, and we did. He did know where 
he was going. We ended up coming out onto West 
Street. I'm not exactly sure where we came out 
originally, probably around Rector or 
thereabouts, because I know it stops. West 



K . LAMANNA 7 

Street eventually stops and becomes a park 
somewhere . 

So we came in right after -- like if 
you went from that direction, it would be from 
the park. Further down would be this street we 
came out on heading towards the World Trade 
Center on West Street. I think it was around 
Rector, but I'm not exactly sure. 

We came out there, made a right-hand 
turn towards the World Trade Center. We went 
down past the first Marriott, coming from that 
direction . 

Q. Roughly heading north now? Heading 
back uptown? 

A. Right, yes, I was heading towards the 
World Trade Center. So there's a Marriott, then 
another building, something called like 72 Post 
or something like that. Then there was a little 
street, and then there was a steak house, 
Morton's steak house. Then there was another 
building, and right next to that building was I 
think Liberty, because the first overpass is 
there. Then on the other side, directly on the 
other side of that, is the second Marriott that 



K . LAMANNA 8 

went down along with the World Trade Center. 

Q. Yeah. 

A. So when we first got there and pulled 
into the area, we were just on the other side of 
that walkway, that first walkway. So we were 
sitting pretty much in front of the Marriott, the 
second Marriott, the one that went down with the 
World Trade Center. 

Q. Okay. 

A. It was total chaos. When we first 
pulled up, there was dust and things burning all 
over the place already. There was just totally a 
lot of debris. Everybody was running in 
different directions trying to get equipment and 
everything else. 

I don't remember seeing a lot of 
civilians at that point. I just remember zoning 
in on all the emergency personnel. I know that 
when we first drove up we were running over body 
parts. That much I remember. 

But we decided at that point we needed 
to find a place to park, somewhat safe and out of 
the way and in case we needed to get out of there 
quickly. We needed to get our equipment and get 



K . LAMANNA 9 

going towards the major scene. 

So I backed up, and I ended up on this 
little -- it isn't there anymore now. It was 
like a little island per se. It was made out of 
cement, and there was some grass on it and things 
like that, which was right behind -- coming back 
now, right behind the walkway, the above, 
overhead walkway. 
Q. Right. 

A. First we parked there. There were a 
lot of other ambulances and fire trucks and 
everything around there. I don't know if you 
want to call it woman's intuition. I don't know 
what you want to call it. But I said to my 
partner, I said, "You know, maybe we should find 
someplace else to park. Maybe we'll wind up 
getting stuck in here. We need to maybe pull out 
a little bit further in case we need to get out 
of here in a hurry." 

So we looked around real quick and we 
saw a spot that was open at the corner right in 
front of Morton's steak house right in front of 
that little street. I don't remember the name of 
the little street that was right there in front 



K . IAMANNA 1 

of Morton ' s . 

He's like, okay, I'll back you up into 
the spot. So he jumps out of the vehicle. We 
backed up into the spot. I no sooner throw the 
vehicle into park, I'm just throwing it into 
park, and the noise started of the first tower 
coming down. 

It was the most horrendous noise I ever 
heard in my life, and it's even hard for me to 
explain now what it sounds like. I know I've 
heard people describe it as thunderous. I'm sure 
it was thunderous. It was just many different 
things . 

So I started screaming at Freddie, "Get 
in the bus." I didn't know what was going on, 
but get in the bus. "Get in the bus! Get in the 
bus! Get in the bus!" He jumps in. We start to 
roll up our windows. Before we know it, it's 
completely black. 

It's not like any darkness I've ever 
seen as far as at nighttime or anything. You 
couldn't see anything. There was no daylight. 
You couldn't see anything out of the windows at 
all. All we could hear is everything falling on 



K . IAMANNA 1 1 

top of the ambulance, the hood and on top. 

I started to panic a little. I'm like, 
"Oh, my God, what are we going to do? Let's get 
out of here." Freddie is like this and that, 
"You just stay calm. Calm yourself down. We'll 
be all right. Take a few breaths." I started to 
calm down, somewhat, as much as I could, but got 
my head together a little bit. 

I said, "You know what? I'm going to 
put it in reverse. I'm going to see how far we 
can get out of here," because I didn't like the 
way everything was piling up at the ambulance. I 
figured any second something was going to come 
flying through the windshield. 

So I did. I put it in reverse. But I 
really went slow. All I had to really do was 
lift my foot off in order to move a little bit, 
because I didn't want to take a chance that 
somebody even in the darkness was running behind 
us. Then I really would have felt bad. 

So we went as far back as we could, and 
then we weren't going anywhere else. So 
obviously I had hit something. So I put it into 
park, and then we just sat there and held each 



K. IAMANNA 12 

other's hands and just waited it out. 

The noise finally stopped. It took a 
little bit, but it started to become daylight. I 
just remember saying, "Oh, my God, look at this. 
This is awful." I took a split second to look 
over to where we had just been parked, and if we 
hadn't moved the ambulance we probably would have 
been dead, because there was huge, huge beams and 
girders and everything else sitting right where 
we were. I could see there was an ambulance in 
front of us, somewhere in front of us, that was 
on fire a little bit ahead. It was just like 
everything was crushed and mangled and covered 
with that big white, gray dust. 

We decided let's get out, let's get our 
helmets on. We hadn't even gotten that far yet. 
Let's get our helmets on, let's get our 
equipment, and let's get out of here and get to 
safety and see what we can find as far as 
patients along the way or whatever. 

We no sooner jump out of the ambulance 
when one of the EMTs that I know from the Bronx 
drops right in front of me. I'm like, "Oh, my 
God, Eddie." He was in extreme pain and 



K. LAMANNA 13 

everything. I'm like, what happened? He's 
like -- he doesn't know. He's totally in shock 
and out of it. He's screaming, "My arm and my 
back. " 

At that point I just scooped him up. 
We ran around to the other side of the ambulance. 
We sat him on the side of the ambulance for now 
until we could figure out and get our heads 
together and get helmets on and everything. He's 
complaining of his arm and his back. I looked at 
his arm, and I could see it was obviously broken. 

In the meantime as we were doing all 
this, one of the EMTs from the AMR bus that we 
followed in came running over. I don't know who 
it is or was. He came running over and said, 
"Oh, my God, oh, my God, I can't find my partner. 
Have you seen my partner?" I'm like, "No. Who 
is your partner, number one. Number two, we're 
not even thinking that far yet." 

I have one of us in front of me, and 
we're trying to get our equipment together. 
Something just happened. We're not exactly sure 
what happened. We're not seeing it like the 
people saw it on TV. We just knew there was a 



K. LAMANNA 14 

noise -- I mean, we could surmise approximately, 
but we didn't really know, because we were so 
close that we still had a lot of buildings in 
front of us . 

So he's freaking out. He's running all 
over the place. Then another medic from up here 
in the Bronx, Joe Jefferson, I ran into him. He 
had been separated from his partner. So he had 
very little equipment on him. So we took his 
equipment, what he had. 

Mind you, I didn't go out as a medic 
that day. All I had was a monitor and a tube 
kit. We took the monitor and the tube kit and 
what little equipment he had, and I think we had 
the trauma bag on us too. Yeah, we had the 
trauma bag. But nothing as far as drug bags or 
anything like that or anything with syringes. 
What did we do with the trauma bag? You know 
what, I don't remember if we had the trauma bag 
or not. 

Anyway, we just threw everything on the 
stretcher, and we put Eddie in the stair chair. 
While we were doing this, another I think he was 
an EMT from Hazollah, a volunteer, came running 



K. LAMANNA 15 

over. He had been separated from his crew. We 
were like a rag tag bunch. 

He said, "You know what, I'm going to 
go over to that building, " pointing to I think it 
was 72 Post or whatever it was called, right next 
to the Marriott, "I'm going to see if it's safe 
in there . " 

By the time I backed up and everything, 
we were sitting in front of the Marriott pretty 
much, so it would have been the next building 
over. So he went running in, and he came back 
and said it looks safe, as safe as it can be. 
Who knows. We don't know what's going to happen 
now, this, that and the other. 

So we just grabbed everything we could, 
grabbed Eddie and wheeled him over. We went into 
this building and took a really good look at him. 
It was like there were other people there, 
civilians and stuff from different places that 
had run into there, I guess, during the first 
collapse . 

So we took a look at him, and he was 
really saying, "I'm really having a hard time 
breathing. I'm really having a hard time 



K . IAMANNA 1 6 

breathing." By this time we were able to do a 
somewhat more complete assessment on him. 

We splinted his arm, and we took a look 
at his back. He had a huge hole in his back on 
the right side. We made an occlusive dressing 
and put that on. He kept saying as time went on, 
"I'm really having a hard time breathing on the 
right side . " 

So Joe and I looked at each other and 
went, oh, God, this guy is going into 
pneumothorax and we don't have the equipment here 
to be able to do anything about this. I'm 
thinking, Jesus, he's going to die right in front 
of us and there's nothing much we can do. 
There's so much we can do when we don't have 
all -- 

So at that particular point we had made 
the decision, all of us, that we were going to 
move farther up towards the park, towards Battery 
Park, for two reasons. Number one, we weren't 
sure if we were completely safe where we were. 
Two, we had to find an ambulance or something to 
transport Eddie out of there. 

So I took the stretcher full of 



K. LAMANNA 17 

equipment. Joe took the stair chair with Eddie 
Martinez. My partner -- along the way we seemed 
to manage to find this big barrel, a tub, 
whatever, full of water. We said we're going to 
need that, not only for drinking but to irrigate 
eyes and whatever else. 

So he's dragging that. I'm taking the 
stretcher full of equipment. Joe has the stair 
chair with Eddie, and off we go. Joe and Eddie 
were in the front, I was in the middle, and 
Freddie was in the back. We were all scattered. 
We were all about a quarter or half a block 
apart, but they're small blocks down there. 
Q. Right. 

A. So at one point I left the equipment 
because I wanted to go back and see how far back 
Freddie was to help move him along. In case he 
was having problems, I could deal with that and 
then we could switch off, so on and so forth. 

So I went back and couldn't find him at 
first. I didn't know where he was. I'm like, 
all right, he'll catch up, type of thing. I 
didn't want to leave the equipment too long 
because the monitor was there. I don't know, 



K . LAMANNA 1 8 

whatever. I'm thinking more about the equipment 
at that particular moment. So off I went back to 
the equipment. 

I no sooner get back to the equipment 
and I go no more than five feet, and the noise 
started again, the second one coming down. Of 
course I didn't know it at the time, but here it 
was again. 

At that split second -- right after 
that I look up. Now the stair chair is empty, 
and Joe and Eddie are gone. I don't know where 
they went to. In that second they were gone. At 
that point I look around to see if I can see 
Freddie again, and all I see is this big mountain 
of debris and smoke and everything coming towards 
me. I'm like, screw the equipment, I'm running, 
and off I go as fast and far away as my legs 
would take me. 

I'm looking for someplace to duck in. 
I couldn't find anyplace to duck in. There was 
nothing really there. This stuff is really right 
next to me. It was really right behind me at 
this point. I had to make a decision to do 
something, anything. 



K . LAMANNA 1 9 

All of a sudden out of the corner of my 
eye I saw a black Jeep with its headlights and 
brake lights on. I went over really quick, and 
it's under one of those buildings that cut 
through from one street to another. So it was 
only like a little underpass. 
Q. Right. 

A. I couldn't get in the car, so I just 
stayed next to it. At that point it was all over 
me. Everything was on me. I couldn't see, I 
couldn't hear, I couldn't breathe. This stuff 
was so thick that I was breathing in I thought, 
oh, God, I'm going to die. I said, I'm going to 
die here alone, how nice. That's what was 
running through my head. 

It felt like forever, and every once in 
a while I would squeak out "Help," just so I 
could hear another human voice. I'm not hurt 
per se, but I didn't want to feel like I was 
totally alone. Of course no one answered me 
because they couldn't hear me, because I couldn't 
hear anything and I couldn't see anything. 

I don't even know how much time went 
by. It took a while. It finally started to 



K . IAMANNA 2 

dissipate just a bit, and I screamed out "Help" a 
couple more times, and I finally got an answer. 
They screamed out, "Where are you?" I'm like, "I 
don't know. Over here." I didn't know where I 
was. "Over here." He said, "Follow my voice." 
I 'm like, okay. 

I'm searching with my eyes again so I 
don't bump into anything. It's still pretty 
dark. I finally bump into him, and he's a 
firefighter from FDNY. I couldn't tell you who 
he was, to this day. I wouldn't know him if I 
tripped over him now. He was there. 
Q. Right. 

A. He said, "Okay. Follow me," because by 
that time now it's daylight again. It had 
dissipated. We just started walking out of there 
together. It was just a total mess. I mean, the 
debris -- the level of dust and debris was inches 
thick like a snowstorm, like three, four, five, 
six inches deep, whatever it was. Just the 
debris and fire and everything all over the place 
and people screaming and yelling and running. 

I was having a hard time breathing. I 
was having a hard time seeing because everything 



K . LAMANNA 2 1 

was in my eyes and in my throat and in my mouth 
and everything. 

We walked a little bit towards the 
park, and we came across this truck that said 
FDNY command center. So we figured it was a good 
enough place to check in to. By this time the 
radio's going crazy. We couldn't get a word in 
edge wise, and they couldn't hear me. I tried to 
go over the air to tell them I lost my partner 
and whatever. 

Not that anybody was really interested, 
only because they kept saying get off the air 
everybody, not to me but to everybody, because 
they wanted to make sure they got the important 
stuff through. 

So we went to the command center and 
knocked on the door. A firefighter let us in. 
The first thing I said to them was "Are we safe 
in here?" He shrugged his shoulders and "I don't 
know." I said, "Well, that makes me feel so much 
better. " 

He was like, "Where are you from?" I 
said, "I'm from the Bronx. I work out of 
Battalion 14. I lost my partner, I lost my 



K. LAMANNA 22 

vehicle, and what do I do now?" He was like, 
"Hang out here for now until we figure something 
out." I kept saying to him, "Well, are we safe 
in here?" I'm thinking, Jesus, I went through 
this twice. I can't go through this anymore. 
He's like, "I don't know." He was honest. He 
didn't know. I'm like, oh, all right, it still 
doesn't make me feel any better. 

So then about a couple minutes later he 
said to me, "Well, I hear they're setting up a 
triage area." I'm like, "Okay, where?" He said, 
"Over at the Staten Island ferry terminal." 
Okay, where is that from here? I don't know 
that. I don't know Manhattan very well. He 
said, "Up a couple blocks or so into the park, in 
that area, Battery Park." I'm like, "Okay, just 
point to me sort of where, and I'll go. I can't 
stay here . " 

So he sort of gave me an idea. I said, 
"Well, thank you very much, and I'll find my 
way," because I just couldn't stay there. I 
didn't know what was going to happen, if 
something else was going to happen. Plus I 
needed to go where I knew EMS would be as far as 



K . LAMANNA 2 3 

being able to help someone else too and so on and 
so forth. 

Off I went. I got about a block and an 
ambulance went by. I'm like banging, "Wait, 
wait, wait, wait for me, wait for me." I'm 
screaming, like a stupid thing. They finally 
stopped, and I jumped in the back. There's a 
doctor and a couple of EMTs . They were off to 
find a baby with asthma. Where they're going to 
find this in the midst of all of this, I don't 
know. I'm like, all right, whatever. 

So we ended up going another block or 
so as far as distance-wise, and we ended up 
near -- the vehicle stopped, the door opened, and 
there was Jerry, Jerry -- he's one of the 
division ALS coordinators -- Bacchus, Jerry 
Bacchus . 

So the door opens, and Jerry Bacchus is 
standing there. I'm like, "Oh, my God, Jerry, 
thank God. Thank you. A face I know." It made 
me feel a little bit better to see somebody that 
I actually knew, because by this time of course I 
had been separated from Freddie and all the 
people I had been earlier. I didn't know where 



K . LAMANNA 2 4 

anybody was . 

He jumped in and started pulling things 
out and whatever. I was having a lot of trouble 
breathing, so he put me on a nebulizer treatment, 
because my pump just wasn't doing a thing. I 
have a little bit of asthma, but it only acts up 
when I get sick. So I did that. 

In the meantime Chief -- a chief was 
there too. He used to work out of OMA. Now he's 
over at downtown -- at Gouveneer, Battalion 4. 

Q. Hirth? 

A. Huh? 

Q. Hirth? 

A. No, not Hirth. He's an older 
gentleman. He's at OMA. He's a newer -- he just 
made chief like right before that. He was a 
captain . 

Q. Oh, Steffens? 

A. Yes, Chief Steffens. That's it. Thank 
you. Chief Steffens. 

He was there too. I had only known him 
from just OMA because I went there once. I saw 
him. He was trying to coordinate things. There 
were just a few of us here and there. There 



K . LAMANNA 2 5 

weren't a lot of us at all. There was only ten 
of us, maybe, give or take; a couple of medics, 
and I think the rest were pretty much BLS . 

At that point we started getting a lot 
of people coming towards us as far as having 
difficulty breathing and stuff in the eyes and 
everything, so we started treating for that. 
Then it was decided we would start putting people 
on boats and get them out of there. 

So we were doing that. We were putting 
whatever we could on boats and just sending them 
wherever they were going: Staten Island, Jersey 
City, Jersey, wherever, just to get them out of 
there, because we didn't know what was going to 
happen even next. 

While we were doing that I remember 
hearing a plane flying overhead. I'm thinking, 
oh, my God, not again, not again. I looked up, 
we all looked up, and there were F-16s. I was 
like, oh, my God. We were in trouble then. 
Okay, that's a first, F-16s flying over New York. 

Anyway, we eventually got most of them 
off onto boats, that came to us, anyway. A lot 
of firefighters wanted to be treated, and they 



K . IAMANNA 2 6 

went right back to the scene. There was just no 
way of keeping them out. 

I also ended up running into Chief 
Brown, Bobby Brown. He and the person he was 
with were just walking aimlessly. I don't know 
where -- I think they might have been headed for 
the terminal eventually, but maybe not. Who 
knows. They were like in shock like the rest of 
us . 

So I explained to him that I was with 
Chief Steffens over there in this port. There 
was a big port. I just remember the big port, a 
big circular port. 

So we ended up spending a few hours 
there. Probably about 1:30, 2:00 in the 
afternoon some of these cell phones started 
coming back up again. People were able to get 
out a couple of calls. So I called my girlfriend 
and let them -- to let her know that -- she was 
hysterical. She knew I was down there. She 
could feel I was down there. 
Q. Woman's intuition. 

A. So I just told her -- I told her I was 
okay, I would get back in touch when I could, and 



K . IAMANNA 2 7 

I gave her a few numbers to call to call people, 
because I didn't want to tie up the lines. That 
must have been around 2:00 in the afternoon. 

Then about an hour later we finally -- 
all of us moved over because people started -- 
there wasn't anybody else really coming to us in 
that particular area anymore. So at that point 
we picked up and we moved everything over to the 
ferry terminal, and we spent the rest of the day 
there . 

We didn't have too many people coming. 
We expected a lot of people. But as you know, 
there weren't that many people coming out, some 
rescue workers who had minor injuries, 
lacerations and things like that. Throughout the 
day, I had just some difficulty breathing and 
all. I had to go back on the neb a little bit. 

Most of the time it was just sitting 
there in a trance like almost, just like shock, 
trying to take this in but not really 
understanding. We heard little bits and pieces 
on the radio that was in the ambulance. We found 
out that the Pentagon had been hit and supposedly 
they were looking for four other planes or 



K . IAMANNA 2 8 

something. There was a whole big thing that they 
were going through. So we only knew bits and 
pieces . 

Then around 4:15 or so, 4:30-ish? I 
don't know. Something like that in the afternoon 
is when seven went down. We couldn't see the 
building itself go down, but we saw all the 
debris and everything kicked up and the smoke 
kick up again. I went to someone and said what 
happened? They told me they heard on the radio 
that seven had just gone down. 

So we were there just all day. I 
didn't get out of there until close to midnight. 
I didn't know anything about Freddie. For the 
most part I had been asking people all day. No 
one had seen or heard from him. Finally I ran 
into Chief Villani at 4:00 in the afternoon, and 
I was explaining to him that I was upset, I 
didn't know how my partner was that I came down 
with that day and everything. 

"Who's your partner?" I told him who 
he is. "Oh, I saw him." I'm like, "Did you see 
him before or after the second collapse?" He 
said, "After the second collapse." I said, okay, 



K . LAMANNA 2 9 

that means he's okay. He was doing the same, he 
didn't know about me type of thing. 

So around midnight -- well, before that 
they were sending people out little by little. 
About midnight my turn came up. The problem was 
I had no vehicle. I had no way of getting back 
up to the Bronx. So what happened was I got 
transported to Battalion 4 . From there I managed 
to hitch a ride to Bellevue. From there I 
hitched a ride to Metropolitan. From there I 
hitched a ride to Harlem, and from Harlem to 
Lincoln. I mean, the crews were really nice 
about it. They went a little bit out of their 
way, but it was extraordinary circumstances. 

Q. Right. 

A. So I didn't get back to the station 
until close to 12:30, quarter to one. I was just 
covered from head to toe and everything. I was 
afraid to touch my hair that it would fall apart, 
because it was so brittle. I ended up -- I had 
to take off all my clothes and stuff before I 
went home. I ended up just putting like a 
hospital thing on. I was like, whatever. I 
finally got all that done, and I headed on out of 



K . LAMANNA 3 

there after 1:00. 

By that time I had already spoke with 
Lieutenant DeSantis. He upset me a little bit 
during the day because at one point when I 
finally got -- those were the two phones calls I 
made. I made one to my girlfriend Lisa and I 
made one to him at 2:00 in the afternoon. 

He gets on the phone and he's like, 
"Where are you?" I'm like, "I don't know 
exactly. I think I'm somewhere in Battery Park." 
I said, "I can't find Freddie. I don't know 
what's going on. He said, "Well, this is what I 
want you to do. I want you to find your partner, 
find your bus, and bring them back up so I can 
put them out as a line unit." 

I'm like, "What? Do you hear me? I 
don't know where Freddie is. I don't know if 
he's dead or alive. I don't think I have an 
ambulance left." I said, "There's no way," and 
whatever. So I was a little upset about that. 
He didn't even bother asking me if I was okay. 

I spoke to him later in the day. He 
was apologetic. He's like, "I'm sorry, I hope 
you're okay." I said, "Have you heard from 



K . IAMANNA 3 1 

Freddie?" He's like, "No." "I'm just telling 
you right now, I'm letting you know I will not be 
in tomorrow. I only need one day. I'll be back. 
I just need one day. I need to get my head 
together and whatever and maybe do some -- CSID 
or something . " 

So the next day I went to CSID. I took 
the day off. Then I came back on Thursday the 
13th. Of course they kept me for overtime, so I 
worked a double, so on and so forth. Then I went 
back that weekend, because I wanted to try to get 
some closure. I got a little bit, but how much 
you can get? I had to try to make peace with it 
a little bit. I ended up catching pneumonia, so 
I was out a little while with that. 

It's just funny how your minds works 
and the things you think about or don't think 
about. I remember when I jumped out of the 
vehicle and found Eddie and brought him there but 
then the bus started to make a funny noise, 
because all this stuff got sucked into whatever 
systems . 

So I went back to turn it off, and I 
made sure I turned the battery off. I locked up 



K. LAMANNA 32 

the doors. I remembered, oh, my God, my 
backpack, should I take it? I'm going to take 
it. I took my backpack. I threw it on my back. 
I had that on my back all day. 

It was just weird how you go through 
certain motions. The vehicle, as far as I'm 
concerned, was all locked up in the front. There 
was a lot of damage to the hood and other places 
to the vehicle. That was done -- that was 
between the two collapses. I didn't know what 
had happened after the second collapse. As far 
as I knew, we didn't even have a vehicle. 
Although that thing has nine lives. It came back 
again. We're not in it anymore. That was enough 
of 448 for me. 

Although I do have one souvenir of that 
day that I don't leave. You know how they say 
American Express you shouldn't leave home without 
it. I have the key to 448. Of course they've 
changed the locks since then. But this is what I 
have left of that day to remind me. At least 
during the first collapse this vehicle saved my 
life, as far as I'm concerned. 

They never made a stink about it, so I 



K. LAMANNA 33 

walk around with it everywhere. I know it sounds 
a little silly but, I don't know, that's how I 
deal with it. 

Q. Whatever works. 

A. One last thing. I just feel bad for 
all the lives that were lost. I knew a couple of 
people that had just transferred over from EMS to 
FDNY. I didn't know anyone else per se except by 
reputation or whatever. It was a great loss, not 
only FDNY but PD but also, which were always 
forgotten, EMS we lost ten people, not all within 
FDNY, but voluntaries, different volunteers, 
privates, everybody. They're just as much as 
important as anybody else. 

But my hearts go out to their families 
as well as all the civilians that were lost that 
day. How odd, I'm looking at a picture of the 
World Trade Center, I found it. Beautiful 
picture, though. 

But yeah, my heart goes out to them. I 
thank God every day that I'm here. There's days 
I wonder why I'm here, why was I spared when 
others had so many -- I'm not married, don't have 
any children, but others did. So there are days 



K. LAMANNA 34 

I wonder why me, why not somebody else. I guess 
it just wasn't my time, but sometimes I ask why. 

Q. I have one question. 

A. Sure. 

Q. When you were heading down towards -- 
actually when you were heading down towards the 
battery, were you coming down the West Side 
Highway? 

A. No. I was I think going east -- oh, I 
had come from -- no, I came from the east. So I 
came off the FDR. 

Q. No, after the collapses. 

A. Oh, after the collapses. 

Q. With Jefferson and -- 

A. Right. 

Q. -- Liberty. 

A. Right. We started -- here's Liberty. 
So we started -- yeah, we were headed towards -- 
I don't know, is that considered the West Side 
Highway or is it still considered West Street? I 
think it's still considered West Street. 

Q. Okay. 

A. So we would have been walking down West 
Street towards I guess Battery Park. I guess 



K. LAMANNA 35 

that's what it is. I'm not a hundred percent 
sure still to this day, but I think that's what 
it is, Battery Park. 

Q. Yeah. 

A. So we were heading towards Battery Park 
down West Street. 

Q. Did you ever catch up again with 
Jefferson? 

A. Jefferson I didn't see until weeks had 
gone by. But I had heard that he had suffered 
minor injuries but that he was okay. Eddie 
Martinez, it turned out he didn't end up getting 
a pneumothorax, by some miracle, I don't know 
how. 

He got transferred -- put on one of the 
boats, not with us but somebody else put him on 
one of the boats, and he ended up over in Jersey 
City. He had to get some pins and stuff in his 
arm, and they had to do surgery to remove a lot 
of shrapnel out of his back. 

He finally started making inquiries. 
He went looking for me and Joe Jefferson, because 
he thought we were the ones that found him 
originally after -- as far as I understand, he 



K . LAMANNA 3 6 

got there just as the second plane hit. So 
originally his time line was a little confused. 

Q. Right. 

A. He didn't realize where he ended up 
afterwards, because he started farther over. As 
far as I know, he started over near Vesey, I 
think, up towards Vesey and Church. So he ended 
up way over from where we were. 

I got his number. He left his number 
with my partner, my actual partner, Dale, and I 
called him up one day and we talked. We had a 
nice conversation. He called us his angels. We 
weren't. We were just there. We took care of 
him -- I mean, we spoke for quite a while. He 
thanked me. He wanted to get together some day. 
He was going up north. 

As a matter of fact, I saw him -- we 
had a Christmas party for the benefit of the two 
FDNY EMS that we lost Lillo and Quinn. So he was 
there, and he was doing much better. 



K. IAMANNA 37 

Freddie, by the time I got back, he had 
already left to go home. I didn't actually see 
him until Thursday. The 13th is when I first saw 
him the first time. We just went over and like 
hugged each other with little tears here and 
there. We both lived through something -- we 
both lived through the first one together, and 
the second one we had to do separately. Neither 
of us -- didn't leave our minds. 

I need to go on duty. 

MR. RADENBERG: The time is now 1530, 
and this is the conclusion of the interview. 



File No. 9110485 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

PARAMEDIC JOEL PIERCE 

Interview Date: January 23, 2002 



Transcribed by Nancy Francis 



J. PIERCE 

MS. BASTEDENBECK: Today is January 23rd, 
2002. The time is 1416 hours. My name is Christine 
Bastedenbeck, Lieutenant with the New York City Fire 
Department. I'm at EMS Battalion 57 conducting an 
interview with the following individual: 

Q. Please state your name, rank, and unit that 
you're assigned to. 

A. Joel Daniel Pierce, paramedic 3927, 35 zebra, 
Battalion 57 . 

Q. Joel, were you on duty the morning of 
September 11th, 2001? 

A. Yes , I was . 

Q. Were you assigned to the World Trade Center? 

A. Yes , I was . 

Q. Can you tell me about the events of that 
morning? 

A. My partner and I were sitting up by McCarren 
Park when we heard a signal 1040 go over the air. I 
didn't know what a 1040 was, so I pulled out my little 
Ready-Medic book and I looked at it and I told my 
partner it was an airline incident. 

Q. Do you know who your partner was that day? 

A. Eric Rodriguez, Paramedic Rodriguez, Shield 
2526. So we heard multiple units being assigned 



J. PIERCE 

immediately from Battalion 31 told to switch to 
Citywide, so I said this has to be pretty big. So I 
switched over my portable to Citywide and you didn't 
hear much at the moment until you heard, I believe it 
was one of the condition bosses in the city screaming 
on the radio, basically send everything that the city 
has to offer because it was pretty bad. So I told my 
partner, who was driving that day, to drive down to the 
waterfront somewhere by Kent, and I believe we came off 
of North 12th. As we rounded the turn, we saw the 
north tower on fire and we were just awestruck by what 
we saw. We parked the vehicle on Kent, got out, stood 
there. My partner called his wife. I just stood there 
staring, and then I watched eventually the second 
plane, I saw it. It looked like it was circling coming 
south, then came back north, striking the south side of 
Tower No. 2. I got pretty sick to the stomach at that 
point. Eventually, the Brooklyn North dispatcher 
contacted us and advised us that we were heading to 
Manhattan at that time, to the World Trade Center. 

We headed over the bridge, the Williamsburg 
Bridge, and my eyes were just fixed on what was coming 
out of the towers, the smoke. As we got down there, we 
didn't exactly know where the main triage area was or 



J. PIERCE 

staging area was. There was just so many people 
running all over the place, and my partner and I, we 
had no clue as to where we were going. Then we found 
ourselves over -- we came back around and we were on 
West Side Highway or West Street by Liberty noticing a 
bunch of ambulances parked on the west side of West 
Side Highway next to No. 1 World Financial Center. 

So we pulled over, we set our vehicle up 
underneath the pedestrian walk on Liberty Street 
between West and I believe it's South End Avenue. We 
were there for a bit and I just stood there looking up 
at the two towers and I just watched people jumping. I 
must have counted about eight people. One of them was 
on fire as he hit the ground. I thought it was just a 
piece of burning debris coming down until my partner 
said that's a person jumping. 

I was with some Captain. I don't know where 
he was from. I said, boss, this is not a good spot to 
be sitting. I mean, stuff from that far up can easily 
get caught in the wind and come over towards us . He 
agreed and we said let's get these vehicle around the 
corner on South End, and that's where we ended up. My 
partner drove the vehicle right over here, just around 
the corner of Liberty. That's where we put the 



J. PIERCE 

vehicle . 

Q. Where you made the X on the map? 

A. Correct. Multiple vehicles along the side 
here. I remember seeing the Hatzolah MERV over here. 
I think that Rescue 2 pulled up over here, multiple 
Fire units. There were a lot of other units from 
Metropolitan, FDNY, EMS and other voluntary units 
pulling up, so they were all lining up and down this 
road here. The Captain asked me to make sure each unit 
was not going to block themselves in, at least one 
person would stay with their unit. I said sure. So I 
ran up and down, made sure they were setting up their 
equipment, have their IVs, if they're ALS, start 
setting up their bags. 

As I came back to report to him, I saw that 
Chief McCracken, Chief Grant, their aides and some 
other officers were at the corner of Liberty Street and 
South End Avenue. Chief Grant noticed me, that I was 
there. I pulled him aside. I advised him what was 
going on over here and that I was going to head back 
over onto the West Side Highway over here and advise 
those guys to get around the corner over here. He said 
that's a good idea, let's get them off the highway. 
Just as I started walking back, just before that 



J. PIERCE 

catwalk on the corner, some maybe 20 feet, I guess, 50 
feet, I heard this sound. 

Q. You were on Liberty Street then? 

A. Yes. It was right around here, I guess where 
the E is on this map. It's around this area, this 
general vicinity where the group was clustered, 
McCracken and all the other officers and their aides 
were. That's when we heard that sound, again, and I 
swear it sounded like another plane coming in, just 
that rumbling noise, that steadily -- that continuous 
rumbling that was getting louder and louder, and I 
think the last words I had were, oh, God not another 
one. So we all ran. We got ourselves in this little 
corner right over here, right by the hexagon here, and 
we all just kind of cowered underneath this little 
overhang right up against the lobby windows. There was 
no place to run. 

Q. The lobby windows of World Financial? 

A. Financial, yes. The hexagon part. 

Q. Okay. 

A. There's a little corner right over here, and 
that's where we basically just crowded together and 
kept our heads down and the rumbling noise just got 
immense at that point and I kind of looked up and all I 



J. PIERCE 

saw was this huge dust cloud going right between the 
two buildings here, between 1 and 2, right where the -- 
going literally between on Liberty Street, and it was 
just this huge wall, like this perfect wall of dust. 
It slammed into Gateway Plaza across the street from us 
and then it basically rolled right back at us and I 
said, oh, shit, this is it, here we go. 

We were all holding hands with each other. 
Wherever you found a hand, you grabbed it and you just 
held on. Unfortunately, I had McCracken's hand and 
he's got some pretty big hands. He squeezed my hand 
pretty good. But I think we were all pretty fricking 
scared at that point. We were all praying quite 
loudly, too. I'm Jewish and I think I was saying Hail 
Marys. I was just joining what everybody else was 
doing. You just didn't know what was going on other 
than the fact that here was this cloud of dust coming 
right at you and you you're just convinced that this is 
it, this is over with, because you don't know what else 
is coming with it. 

So basically I just held my breath and just 
waited and I just felt that blast of air and dust come 
right at me. The glass held up. We were pretty amazed 
about that. I took a breath, started gagging. There's 



J. PIERCE 

a deli right on the side here. There was an open 
door. All I saw was this door, so I like created a 
human chain of people and I just led them through this 
door, this little deli. I said just follow this and 
follow the building, head south. 

I went back, I don't know, I tripped on 
something, banged my foot and some guy fell on top of 
me. I picked him up, pulled him away. I came back to 
where we were and along the side, the westernmost side, 
It was like I noticed a lot of the glass was still 
intact, you could see like maybe four or five panes of 
glass still held up, and then I heard somebody banging 
on the other side. So I believe it was myself and 
someone else, we smacked the window out, walked into 
the lobby area of 1 World Financial Center, yelled 
inside if anybody was in there, and this guy yelled 
out, yeah. I said can you see my flashlight? He's 
like yeah. I said, well, walk into the light. Not 
exactly the words you want to hear said. But he kind 
of got to me and I grabbed him and I dragged him over 
to where the broken window was and said get out through 
here and go. 

I proceeded across the lobby to the other 
side, closer towards Liberty Street, the northeastern 



J. PIERCE 

corner, just on the other side of the pedestrian bridge 
crossing the highway, and I walked out. All the glass 
windows were completely smashed out on the east and 
north sides of the hexagon part. I walked out, walked 
around. I was like -- I just didn't say much at all. 
I was looking at all the burning vehicles. Nothing but 
burning vehicles outside, all the ambulances. 

I walked off into the street area and I think 
that's where I found Chief Wells, Charlie Wells, who 
was kind of like crawling in the dust. I yelled out 
his name. He kind of picked his head up. I ran over 
to him, picked him up and dragged him over towards the 
World Financial Center, and I guess that's where the 
shock of everything really kicked in now because I just 
looked. I was like where the hell is the tower? Where 
is everything? Did they both come down? I didn't 
know. I just stood there and then he had to kind of 
verbally slap me, not physically, just like, Joel, wake 
up, wake the fuck up, we need you here, excuse me, we 
need you here on this, and I kind of snapped to it 
again . 

I walked around, grabbed some helmets, cop 
helmets that were like laying all over the place, gave 
them to people who didn't have helmets, looked around, 



10 
J. PIERCE 



see if I could find anybody, see if they needed help. 
Most people were walking wounded. I think that was it, 
really. A lot of people were uniforms just totally 
walking around like they were ghosts. They were like 
it was just amazing what just happened. 

I helped out moving things around, getting 
people, making sure everything was okay, inspecting 
some of the ambulances, looking inside, didn't find 
anybody in none of them. I headed back towards my bus 
because I realized my partner was missing. We went 
back there. I found him coming to me and he's like 
where the hell were you? I was like where the hell 
were you? He told me that he was -- we went back over 
to the ambulance and we found it completely covered in 
dust and debris, the back window was smashed out. It 
looked like it took a beating, just all this crap that 
was on it. 

He says there's an evacuation in effect; 
we're getting the hell out of here. I was like, yeah, 
okay. So he said the vehicle's dead, it's shot, 
because it was running at the time, so it must have 
sucked up all that dust and it clogged up the vents and 
everything. I figured the best thing to do was, 
because I'm hazmat trained, I'm trained with the SCBAs, 



11 

J. PIERCE 



to grab my air bottle, he grabbed his, we grabbed our 
face masks, and then this ambulance was pulling away 
and we jumped in the back of that and we headed down 
South End, down towards the waterfront, as far as it 
would go. 

Q. At this time only the first tower had 
collapsed? 

A. The first tower had collapsed, correct. 
That's as far as we know. I mean, you couldn't see 
anything. It was just such a huge dust cloud, you just 
didn't see a damn thing, other than you did see some 
debris and it was like large pieces of building and 
just nothing but a dust cloud. 

So we got down there. There was this church 
down there. We just kind of like all hung around, we 
just sat there, and we were like what just happened? I 
mean, we were just still -- everybody was in awe. More 
ambulances were showing up from multiple agencies . 
Again I was tasked with -- because I had no ambulance 
left. So it's like my partner and I were pretty much 
useless at the moment unless they actually were going 
to set up a true triage area. We had no equipment 
other than our air bottles. This one Lieutenant said 
go to each ambulance and make sure, if they're ALS, to 



12 
J. PIERCE 



have their lights flashing, and if they're BLS, to have 
them turned off, and each ALS unit set up their 
equipment appropriately, get their IVs hung up and get 
ready for casualties. I was like sure. So I ran up 
and down doing that, made sure everything was all set 
up. 

After I finished that, I came back and I 
found my partner puffing away at some oxygen. I go 
what's the matter with you? He said I got chest pain, 
and he's like don't you dare call the Lieutenant over. 
So I was like, yeah, okay. So I was like is it because 
of the dust? He goes yeah. So I figured it was 
because he sucked so much dust in, like myself, and he 
said my chest is burning from all the dust. Like all 
right, just chill for a moment, I'll be back. I came 
back and he looked even worse and I was like you're 
going to the hospital whether you like it or not, and 
he started arguing with me. I said don't fuck with me, 
you're going to the hospital. They had a physician 
come over that was down there volunteering. So he 
looked at him, looked at his EKG, did something, he 
said you're going to Vinny's and that's final. So I 
said, listen, just do it, go, be safe, don't be 
stupid. I'll be all right. So, actually, excuse me, 



13 
J. PIERCE 



just before that, I was along the waterfront 
esplanade. I'm sorry. 

Q. Okay. Go ahead. 

A. Along the esplanade where people were coming 
down the waterfront there. There were a lot of people 
running down, so I was escorting down this way towards 
where the boats were to get them over to, I guess, 
Liberty Island or to the Jersey side or wherever the 
boats were taking them to. I saw this one boat with a 
camera crew on it. I don't know if you're familiar 
with it, but the Green Monster they call it. It's like 
a high-speed tour boat that races up and down the water 
around the island, gives a tour of the island. Well, I 
saw them. I waved them over and I told them, go around 
south, come around and turn to where the bulkheads are 
and start picking up people and get them out of here, 
and they listened to me. They actually did that. It 
was pretty good. 

I remember seeing this one Lieutenant from I 
think Engine 229, that's the area up in Greenpoint 
where I cover mostly. So I was like you're from 229. 
He goes yeah, who are you? Oh, you're from that 
ambulance around the area. Yeah. He said, listen, do 
yourself a favor and get out of here. I think just as 



14 
J. PIERCE 



I was heading south again, that's when the north tower 
collapsed because I remember seeing another huge cloud 
of dust basically just cover this whole area going to 
the west side, all over towards the Hudson River area. 

I made it back down towards just before the 
Battery here. I don't know what street that is. But 
that's when my partner started having more problems and 
he was told you're out of here, after we were at this 
one park resting for a moment. Now we're with all 
those ambulances. I'm just sitting there doing 
absolutely nothing. He's gone, I got nothing, and I 
was getting very itchy. When I start wanting to do 
something, I get itchy. I'm like I have to do 
something. I can't just sit on my laurels and do 
nothing. That's just not my style. 

I told this one Lieutenant, I said, I'm going 
back up there. I'm doing nothing here. This is B.S. 
Why are we sitting here doing nothing? He's like hang 
out here Pierce, don't you disappear on me. Then I 
stood around waiting, waiting, waiting, waiting, 
waiting. It was just a waiting period and it was 
driving me absolutely fucking insane. I mean, 
literally, I was really going nuts. So I was like, 
listen. At one point I was like, I got no girlfriend, 



15 
J. PIERCE 



no dependents. I'm not worried. I don't know if it's 
like a superman feeling or something, but I had to get 
up there because I know people needed my help and that 
was it. 

So I spoke with another Lieutenant. I don't 
know who it was. Maybe Lieutenant Soto. I said I got 
to go back up there. He says, well, let me go with you 
a little bit, I'll see how far it is. He was like how 
far away is it? I was like around four blocks. I lied 
to him. It was a little farther than four blocks. But 
we got up there. He became the triage Lieutenant and I 
was his aide for the day between One Liberty Plaza and 
Engine 10/Ladder 10. So basically we just stayed there 
the entire night, just transporting patients back and 
forth, getting up to Liberty triage, where I did some 
work in helping out as well. That's what I did all 
night. I maybe had a two-hour catnap on the marble 
floor at One Liberty Plaza, woke up again, not even, 
you know, something like that. 

I remember at one point I was back down, I 
think I was down by -- in front of Engine 10/Ladder 
10 --no. I was in front of Liberty Plaza and they 
said they needed morphine down there. They found 
somebody inside and they were going to have to take his 



16 
J. PIERCE 



legs off and they need morphine. They saw me and they 
said are you a medic? I go yeah. You got morphine? I 
go yup . The guy who was with me, he said you're coming 
with me and they physically grabbed me. They said 
you're coming with us. They said you're coming with 
us, we need you now, we need your drugs. 

At that point I found myself on the pile and 
I don't know if -- it felt like I was hallucinating 
because just looking around, I was up on top of that 
pile a good way in, it was hot and I was looking at all 
these holes down. It was like one wrong step and I'm 
dead. If I fell into that little hole, I'm dead and 
that was it, because I could see the flames below, you 
could see the redness. I knew if I went in, it was 
like the pits of hell. It was like Dante's Inferno, I 
guess you could call it. I was in the remains of the 
south tower, between the south tower and near the 
hotel, and it was something, just being there, all the 
way in. I don't know how far in I was. I must have 
been a good 200 feet in when I was going up and down 
these piles of debris. Then I got called out and I 
learned that they managed to free the guy's legs up, so 
that made me happy. I got out of there. I climbed all 
the way back, assisted with the hose pulling because 



17 
J. PIERCE 



they needed a lot of fire hose in there. So I was part 
of the hose line with a lot of other firemen and all 
the rescue workers. 

I took a break again, headed back over to 
10/10, sat there, drank, had some fluids, and I think 
that's where I saw Chief Tramontana. He came over to 
me. He says are you all right? I just looked at him. 
I was like how can one not feel all right? Look what 
just happened. I almost had a brush with death. He 
said all right, just take a break, relax. 

I worked through the night. I met up with 
some other people, EMT Bruce Hydock, Battalion 57, EMT 
Richardson, Battalion 57. Who else? EMT Jason Steele, 
Battalion 57. Those are the only familiar faces I can 
remember. In fact, it's funny because you couldn't 
even recognize them at first because they had to remind 
me who they were. 

I took a minor break and went back down to 
10/10, met up with this Lieutenant, I forgot who it 
was, and I said, listen, boss, I'm going to take a walk 
over to -- over by Liberty and see what my ambulance 
looks like. I started walking down Liberty, but that 
was completely blocked up between Greenwich and 
Washington from the debris from the south tower. So I 



J. PIERCE 

remember walking down Greenwich, down Albany, and 
coming back around. I found my ambulance and it was 
pushed over to the side, I think. I think some earth 
movers or something came over and pushed it over to the 
side out of the way. 

I walked over to where I was taking cover, 
walked back, got something to drink, something to munch 
on, and I think that's when I was just like somewhere 
by Engine 10/Ladder 10, I kind of laid down for a 
moment on a long board, and I think that's where I 
really started to pass out, when I think Captain Olsen, 
I think it was -- I don't know who. I think it was 
Captain Olsen who ordered me to go to the command post, 
which was far up on the West Side Highway by I guess 
St. John's. I don't know where they set it up. By the 
school . 

Q. The college or the high school? 

A. There was a high school, some school, a 
public school. 

Q. Stuyvesant High School? 

A. Maybe that was it. That might have been it. 
He walked me inside there, and then I found a cot over 
by some triage area and I just walked over to it and 
just completely fell asleep. I got up like two hours 



19 



J. PIERCE 



later, walked over across the highway to the command 
post . 

Q. How did you get back to your battalion? 

A. I was driven back. Captain Burns saw me. A 
friend of hers was heading back to Brooklyn and he said 
he would give me a ride back, which he did. I headed 
back . 

Q. Approximately what time did you get back to 
Battalion 57? 

A. I don't know. Maybe 12:00 o'clock, I guess. 
I can't remember. 

Q. Midnight you mean? 

A. Day. 

Q. The next day? 

A. The next day. 

Q. The next afternoon. Okay. 

A. All I know is I was on the clock for about 32 
straight hours. I was on the clock that long. Then I 
just -- a bunch of people approached me and 



I showered up up there and cleaned up, had all my stuff 
put in red bags because there was just so much blood on 



20 
J. PIERCE 



them and everything. 

That was pretty much it for that day. Then I 
didn't go back there to work, on one of the standby 
units, the ALS units, for like about maybe two weeks -- 
I stayed away from there. I was definitely there for a 
long time. People were telling me you were considered 
MIA for a long time. That's pleasing to know, to find 
out that I was missing in action. But I was, I guess, 
to some people. My radio didn't work at one point. I 
guess -- I don't know why it didn't work. So they said 
they were calling for you like crazy because they 
didn't know where you were. I was like me neither. 
There were no street signs. Everything was smashed 
down . 

Q. Is there anything else you want to add to the 
events of that day? 

A. I don't know what there is to add, if I've 
forgotten so many things or if they stick in my head. 
Maybe some things are just being recessed away and then 
it's going to come out in the wrong moments. I've 
forgotten a lot of stuff. I've forgotten names of 
people. I guess my memory span is kind of shot to hell 
a little bit. I'm still coughing a lot and I don't 
even smoke. That's all I can think of right now. 



21 
J. PIERCE 



MS. BASTEDENBECK: Okay. This interview is 

concluded. The time now is 1449 hours. Thank you very 
much, Joel. 

PARAMEDIC PIERCE: You're welcome. 



File No. 9110486 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

EMT JASON CHARLES 

Interview Date: January 23, 2002 



Transcribed by Nancy Francis 



J. CHARLES 

MR. ECCLESTON: Today's date is January 23rd, 
2002. The time is 2112 hours and my name is 
Christopher Eccleston of the New York City Fire 
Department World Trade Center Task Force. I am 
conducting an interview with the following individual: 

Q. Please state your name. 

A. Jason Charles. 

Q. Your rank. 

A. EMT. 

Q. Shield. 

A. 5114. 

Q. And your assigned battalion. 

A. 13. 

Q. Mr. Charles, were you assigned to the World 
Trade Center disaster? 

A. No, I wasn't. 

Q. Did you respond to the World Trade Center 
disaster on 9/11? 

A. Yes, I did. 

Q. In your own words, could you please tell me 
about the events of the day? 



We got to Madison 



J. CHARLES 

and 28th Street when we saw -- me and my son saw black 
smoke. I had thought it was just a regular structural 
fire. So I told my son, listen, let's -- my son, mind 
you, is only three years old. I said let's go check 
out this fire. So we start walking down the block and 
we get up to Fifth Ave. and a lady walks up to me and 
says a plane hit the Trade Center, and I looked at her 
like she was crazy. I said it might have been a 
helicopter, not a plane. So I kept walking. I got to 
Broadway and now I could see the smoke just traveling 
east over the city, and another guy walked up to us and 
said a plane hit the towers. So I speeded up my 
walking to Sixth Ave., put my son on a bike, and we got 
to Sixth Ave. and I saw the giant hole in Tower 1. 
As I'm staring at the hole in Tower 1, I 
walked across the street, across Sixth Ave. to the west 
side of Sixth Avenue, to see Tower 2, and at the time 
Tower 2 was intact. It wasn't touched yet. I looked 
down at my son and I repeated to him I couldn't believe 
what was going on, and I told him, oh, my God, and I 
heard people calling, oh, my God, look, look, and as I 
looked up, the second plane hit the second tower and 
there was a humongous fireball rolling up the side of 
the building. What delayed reaction I heard was the 



J. CHARLES 

sound itself, the explosion itself. 

So I looked back down at any son and said 
(inaudible), baby, we have to go home, thinking to 
myself, Jesus, they're going to need every last EMS 
personnel in the city to go down. So I hesitantly 
scrambled along the street. At one point I lost my son 
for maybe a minute and I looked for him and then I 
found him. I got him back on the bike. We rode back 
across the street. I started dialing numbers to call 
my brother, my wife. At the time me and her were 
broken up, so we were just getting back together. So I 
started looking for anybody to call to take my son. 

So I remembered the baby-sitter. So I shoot 
back down 28th Street over to Second and Third, taking 
my time, making sure I didn't get into an accident with 
my son. So it took me probably about ten minutes from 
Sixth Ave. to Second and Third with my son. We get 
upstairs, I knock on the baby-sitter's door, and she 
immediately takes my son out of my hands. She doesn't 
even ask me what's going on. So she takes my son and I 
give her something else I had on my bike, and she goes 
you going down there? I go yeah. She goes you want to 
look out my window? I told her, no, I'm going to get a 
better view. 



J. CHARLES 

As I'm waiting for the elevator, for some 
reason, the elevators broke down, both of them. So now 
I'm waiting another five, ten minutes for the elevators 
and I'm like getting more and more frustrated as I'm 
waiting for the elevators, and then I said screw it. I 
threw the bike on my back and I ran down 19 flights of 
steps. I got downstairs, I jumped on my bike, I got 
myself together, I checked the gears of my bike, made 
sure I had air in my tires, and then I took off. 

I took off to 27th Street because you can cut 
through the blocks between the buildings, and I took 
off 27th Street, made a left, cut down towards Second, 
and then made a quick right going towards the Trade 
Center. I'm riding on the curb and I see a fire truck 
to my left and I speed up peddling and I jump off the 
curb next to the fire truck, landing probably about a 
foot away from the truck. A firefighter on the truck 
looks at me and he's like holy, you know, like he 
couldn't believe it, and now I'm riding next to the 
fire truck speeding down Second Ave., which is a slight 
downhill. I didn't even get the engine number. It was 
an engine truck, but I didn't get the engine number. 

So I'm racing down Second Ave. with all the 
emergency vehicles, like following behind a fire 



J. CHARLES 

truck. I come up onto a station wagon, I cut my 
brakes, and I just missed the station wagon, almost 
getting pinned between a bus. So now I'm flying, you 
know, I squeezed just between a bus and a station wagon 
to pull off to the left again to almost get hit by an 
ESU truck. So now at this point I'm passing 23rd 
Street and the space becomes tight between another bus 
and a van and I barely squeezed through that and I'm 
flying down the street, down Second Ave., and now I'm 
passing the Police Academy, which I think is on 21st 
Street, 21st Street between Second and Third, and I see 
a cop standing with the barricades, next to the 
barricade, and he's looking like he wants to go. He's 
like, you know, he looked like he was all amped as I'm 
passing him. He just wanted to -- it was like he 
wanted to jump in the next vehicle and go. 

So I keep racing down there. I get to about 
Beth Israel Hospital, I don't know if it's 16th Street, 
15th Street, and I start to lose all my energy. The 
first wave of emergency vehicles had left me at about 
15th Street. I kept pedaling. I stopped at 14th 
Street because of the light. I wasn't about to get hit 
by another bus going crosstown. So I start peddling 
again as the light turns green and I start picking up 



J. CHARLES 

my speed a little bit and then I hear a second wave of 
emergency vehicles coming and they gave me the second 
adrenaline rush. So I started racing with them and I'm 
racing alongside of the ESU truck for a good block and 
then the streets just opened up and they start going 
and the ambulances start passing me. I think three 
FDNY ambulances and a Metro Care ambulance passed me, 
and then the rest of them were cop cars, fire trucks, 
and I guess a Battalion Chief, a fire division 
suburban . 

So I get to Houston. Second Avenue now turns 
into Christie Street and I jump back onto a curb, and 
at that point all of -- the second wave of emergency 
vehicles left me and I'm flying down the street and I 
jump off a curb again, landing next to a minivan, which 
I just missed, or it missed me, and as I'm coming down 
the street, I'm not sure if it's East Broadway that 
crosses Christie Street, but a third wave of emergency 
vehicles come down and I could hear them at least three 
or four blocks behind me. They start passing me and I 
start rushing with them and they gave me a third 
adrenaline rush. 

I'm rushing with them and we all get to Canal 
Street, where everybody came to a stop because -- I'm 



J. CHARLES 

not sure if it's Ladder 9 or Engine 9 was coming off 
the Brooklyn Bridge. It probably wasn't Ladder 9. But 
there was another ladder truck coming off the Manhattan 
Bridge and everybody stopped to let them go, and then I 
waved on the other emergency vehicles who were behind 
me to go ahead of me and they all flew down Canal 
Street for a block and hung a right on -- I don't know 
what street it was. But I know that, when I went 
behind them, as I ride behind them, now we're in 
Chinatown. As I ride behind them, I guess they were 
like special forces from the courts or the FBI 
building, in that area, federal cops or whatever, 
jumped in front of me and I yelled at him EMS, EMS, and 
he jumped out of my way and I kept riding. 

At this point now I'm passing behind the 
courts . I got behind the courts and I go underneath 
like the Brooklyn Bridge overheads and I pull up on I 
think it's Reade Street, right next to City Hall, and 
then I see both the towers smoking like chimneys. I 
mean, it was like the worst sight in the world. As I 
pulled up onto -- I think it was -- I'm not sure what 
street, but it wasn't Reade Street, I'm not sure what 
street, but it was right next to City Hall -- I saw one 
person fall out the building. As I keep riding, I look 



J. CHARLES 

over to my left and there's just a crowd of people 
staring like they couldn't believe it, and I'm staring 
at them and they're staring at the towers. I see 
detectives and FBI agents running around the street 
like they didn't know what to do, what was going on. 

So I had my ID out prior to that because I 
was trying to flag down a vehicle as I was racing down 
Second Ave. to stop. I mean, I knew they wasn't going 
to stop, but if they did, good, I would have jumped in 
with them. But nobody stopped. So I had my ID out 
prior to that and I was flashing all the detectives and 
FBI agents and they're just waving me through. 

I get to Broadway, Broadway and I think it's 
Vesey, and I slam on my brakes because a lady cuts in 
front of me. Now, at that point, I just started like 
lightly riding to look for a Lieutenant, an EMS 
Lieutenant, and I ran into an EMS Lieutenant about once 
I got to Dey and Broadway. So I identified myself as 
an EMS off-duty, and she was like good, we're setting 
up triage. They set up triage between Dey and the next 
street north of Dey -- south of Dey. Sorry. So she 
starts setting up triage and I told her I was going to 
be back. I was going to lock my bike up. I locked my 
bike up on Dey between Broadway and Fulton and I go 



10 
J. CHARLES 



back and I started triaging patients. I had no triage 
tags in my hand. So they had already had the triage 
tags arriving, so I started asking questions, you know, 
I had no ACRs neither. So I started asking them 
questions about their history, if they had asthma 
history or whatever. 

Then I ran into another EMS guy who had a 
bike. I was sidetracked by him. He asked me where did 
I lock my bike up, and I told him over here. I took 
over to where my bike was. Me and him chained our 
bikes up together. We went back over there and we 
started triaging more patients. I ran into one patient 
who said she was having an asthma attack. Now, at that 
point I had went over to a Metro Care bus to ask if 
they had any albuterol. They didn't have any for 
whatever reason. So then I went -- I remembered where 
my Lieutenant went -- the Lieutenant I ran into. 
Sorry. I think she was from Battalion 4. I ran over 
to Fulton and Church Street, where there was another 
triage center set right in front of the towers, in 
front of the Millenium Hotel across the street from the 
towers . 

At that point, I run down Fulton Street and a 
PA cop, Port Authority cop, stops me, and I flash my ID 



11 

J. CHARLES 



and he's giving me flack about, you know, you're not 
going down here. I'm like, listen, I've got an asthma 
patient over there on Broadway. He's like no, you 
ain't going down there. She's not getting albuterol 
today. I was like all right, you know Rudy Charles? 
Rudy Charles is a Port Authority cop, my father. He 
goes no, not today. So I can see he was just being 
difficult . 

So I ran back over to Broadway and I ran into 
a firefighter named Firefighter Anderson. If I'm not 
mistaken, he's an IC for the fire cadets, the fire 
cadet program. I used to be a fire cadet. That's how 
I knew him. He gave me a turnout coat to wear because 
I needed to be identified as a city worker. So he gave 
me the turnout coat and I ran back over to -- and he 
was standing on Dey and Broadway. I ran back over to 
Fulton and Church and the PA cop was still standing 
there and he runs over to me and I tell him, you know, 
stay the fuck over there, and he's like all right, the 
FBI is going to stop me. So as I'm walking by him, the 
FBI cops looked -- the FBI agents. Sorry. They're 
looking at me and they're like, you know, they just 
looked at me and just let me go through. 

So I get over to the Lieutenant. He was 



12 
J. CHARLES 



talking to a Chief and a Captain. I didn't get their 
names. The Chief had an eagle on his collar, so this 
was a deputy. So now I asked the Lieutenant was there 
any albuterol. She says go check the ambulance over 
there. I didn't get the ambulance unit or the bus 
number. There were two EMTs working on a severe burn 
patient, it looked like 30 percent of his body was 
burned, and they were working on him. I jumped on the 
bus and I asked for albuterol, and the guy turned 
around and he gave me albuterol and a nebulizer. 

So I take the albuterol and the nebulizer and 
I run back over to Dey and Broadway, where the other 
triage center was. I get over there. Metro Care found 
their albuterol. Okay. So after all that running 
around, Hatzolah comes. They're coming in and now they 
have nine EMTs and I think two paramedics. I had told 
them we need at least three of your guys over at Church 
and Fulton because there's only two EMTs there, the 
Captain, the Lieutenant and the Chief, and he's like 
no, we're going to keep them here because everybody is 
coming here. I was like, guy, there's more people 
coming out of that building going to that triage center 
than those two EMTs can handle -- three. Sorry. It 
was three EMTs there. He's like no. I was like, 



13 
J. CHARLES 



listen, right now I need your help. I don't need you 
to give me your -- what's that called? 

Q. Sarcasm? 

A. No. Superior complex. And he was like all 
right, all right. So then I said I'll be right back, 
and then I ran back over to the Lieutenant on Fulton 
and Dey -- I mean Fulton and Church, and I get over 
there and I'm like, Lieutenant, we got a triage center 
that has too many chiefs and no indians . We need 
somebody with status to go over there and let them know 
what's going on. So she's like okay and she sends an 
EMT over there. I think he was a medic. I'm not even 
sure. But this guy I remember, a white guy about my 
height, 5 '10", 5 '11", he had shades on at the time, 
spiky hair, I think he's from Battalion 4, too, he 
walked over to Dey and Church. He started to cut up 
Dey to go to Church, which is right next to the Century 
21 store. 

So now, I guess, I saw him cutting up there, 
so now I made the decision that I was going to go into 
the buildings and start helping everybody else out 
because I saw the firefighters standing over there 
carrying people out and there were a lot of EMTs over 
there who weren't FDNY. They were like, I guess, from 



14 
J. CHARLES 



Bronx -- I mean like Brooklyn and Queens. So they were 
there and they had like EMT on the tape on their shirt 
and they were like helping people out. I started to 
head towards the building and these two EMT females, 
they had this heavyset lady. They were walking her 
over to the triage center. So she gets over to the 
triage center and she sees me and a Lieutenant and 
decides that she wants to pass out. So, all right, she 
passes out on the ground. So I started to walk past 
her because I'm like, well, they got her. Then I saw 
that the Lieutenant and the two EMS females were having 
a problem lifting her up. So I told the two EMS ladies 
to move and me and the Lieutenant picked her up. I 
grabbed her and the Lieutenant picked her up by the 
legs and we start walking over slowly to the curb, and 
then I heard an explosion from up, from up above, and I 
froze and I was like, oh, shit, I'm dead because I 
thought debris was going to hit me in the head and that 
was it. 

Then everybody stops and looks at the 
building and then they take off. The Lieutenant 
dropped her legs and ran. The triage center, everybody 
who was sitting there hurt and, oh, you know, help me, 
they got up and everybody together got up and ran. I 



15 
J. CHARLES 



looked at them like why are they running? I look over 
my shoulder and I says, oh, shit, and then I turned 
around and looked up and that's when I saw the tower 
coming down. I saw the -- it looked like the top maybe 
70, 60 floors coming off the building, and I had stood 
there thinking maybe the towers were not going to hit 
me. Then I looked closer and two pieces of debris fly 
over my head about 40, 50 stories up, flying over my 
head, and I was like, shit, I'm out of here. 

I grabbed the lady and I tugged on her twice 
and she wouldn't get up at that point. She got up on 
one knee, actually, and then she wouldn't get up. Then 
I let her go and I started to run, and I'm hauling ass 
down Fulton, up Fulton actually, running east. 
Actually, as I'm running east, I stopped and I told 
myself what are you doing? Jason Charles, go back for 
her. So I turned around and went back to the lady. I 
get back down to -- I mean, it was only like ten 
steps. So I took another ten steps back and I get back 
down there and she's gone, and I'm like all right. 

So now I look over to my left real quick and 
I see two firefighters running at me with this 
horrified look on their face. One firefighter was 
trying to drop his Scott pack and it got caught. The 



16 
J. CHARLES 



buckle that goes around the Scott pack around the waist 
got caught. So he was trying to -- he was unbuckling 
that while he was running. The other guy, he dropped 
it off his shoulders, but it looked like it got caught 
onto his arms, and then the dust hit them and then the 
metal crashed on them, and I turned around and I 
started running. I saw people -- as I'm turning around 
running, I picked up people who were coming out this 
corridor right in front of Millenium Hotel that leads 
you into like the mall plaza on Liberty. I saw people 
running out of there, like running against the wall, 
against Building 5, running north. Yes, running 
north . 

So they were all -- they're running north and 
I'm running and in my head I'm like let's jump in that 
bus over there. I said, nah, just run. Then I'm 
starting to run and I see firefighters, you know, I 
mean, like when everybody started running, I'm seeing 
two firefighters drop their Scott packs, FBI agents 
took off, EMTs took off, and that told me this is a 
real situation, this wasn't nothing to take lightly. 
So that's when I had ran and left the lady, came back 
for her. 

Now, as I see the two firefighters 



17 
J. CHARLES 



(inaudible), I made the decision not to jump in the 
back of the ambulance that was parked right on the 
corner of Fulton and Church. I start running up the 
block. As I start running up Fulton, I see this lady 
who I left behind hauling ass up Fulton and her dress 
is like flapping in the wind, and I'm like look at her 
go, you know, and I'm just running and she had a nice 
lead on me, so she was like half a block up already. 
But I made sure I found her first before I left. 

So I started running and now I'm panicking. 
I'm like, oh, man, I'm dead, I'm dead, and there's all 
these people in front of me and they're running slow 
and I'm like, oh, Jesus Christ, and I stopped running 
and I started walking real fast behind them because I 
wasn't going to push anybody out of the way. So there 
was an opening and I took the opening and I started 
hauling ass, but this older black guy falls in front of 
me and I jump over him and I stopped and turned around 
and two people scooped him up and kept running. It was 
like a football scene, like they scooped up a football 
and kept running with him, and they're running and then 
now I'm running. I almost started crying at one 
point. I'm like, oh, man, I'm dead, I'm dead, and I 
stopped running and said screw it, I'm going to die 



J. CHARLES 

right here, let me take it as it is. Then something 
said, stupid, run, you know, run and die running. So I 
started running again. 

At one point -- at some point, I'm not sure, 
but the building -- that horrible twisting metal sound 
of a freight train or whatever -- it's the worst sound 
in the world -- stopped. But then it started again. 
Then I started hauling ass again, and at one point I 
stopped, like maybe 20 feet before I got to Broadway, 
still on Fulton, flying up to Broadway, and I let 
everybody run past me. I said everybody go, go, go. 
Now I ran the rest the way down to Broadway and then I 
looked to my right down towards Dey and I see at least 
a 40, 50-story ball of dust rushing at us. I'm like 
holy shit. I'm like all right, run, and I kept running 
and I ran towards Vesey, and then Vesey, the dust came 
around there, but for some reason the dust didn't come 
up Fulton yet, not as fast and hard and as dark as it 
did at Vesey and Dey. 

So now I had that trapped feeling and I 
thought I was really screwed because I knew behind that 
was nothing but death. If you sucked on the dust, that 
was pretty much it. So I yelled everybody over here 
and I pointed to a store. The store's name -- it was a 



19 
J. CHARLES 



delicatessen, actually. It's called Au Pain or Au Bon 
Pain. 

Q. Au Bon Pain? 

A. Yes, thank you, that famous delicatessen. I 
ran over there and like three other people followed 
me. One guy I remember stopping, like he was still on 
Fulton, running up Fulton. He had stopped dead in his 
tracks and covered his face. That was actually before 
the dust started rushing at us, but I thought I'd add 
that in. There was a guy, he just stopped dead in his 
tracks, he didn't want to run anymore, and I remember 
reaching for him and then the dust caught him and I 
kept running. But the dust coming up Fulton was a 
little lighter, and I don't know why it was light 
there, but it was dark as hell coming down Dey and 
Vesey . 

So anyway, we run up to the store and I 
grabbed the door and I'm "open the fucking door," 
because it was locked and I had this look on my face 
like hurry up, like I was about to cry again, and the 
manager of the store scrambled through his keys and he 
ran over to the door and he unlocked it. By the time 
he got to the door, the dust caught us. I held onto 
the door and then I felt the door open and I opened it 



20 
J. CHARLES 



up and I shoved the two people in and then I closed the 
door right behind me. I get inside the store and I 
start cursing and I almost started to pick a chair up 
and throw it, if you know what I'm saying, through the 
window, but that wouldn't have made no sense because 
when I looked behind the window, it was completely 
black. I mean, it was like looking into hell. 

As I'm looking, I see one person, it looked 
like a white guy with glasses, walking up against the 
glass of the window. I'm like holy shit. So I run 
back outside and the door was locked again. I turned 
around to the manager, open the fucking door, and he's 
like, oh, I'm sorry. I said leave this shit open, and 
he said all right. He opens the door and I opened the 
door and I yell outside. I yell outside and it sounded 
like I was yelling in an empty room, like the acoustics 

-- if anybody ever heard the acoustics in an empty 
room, it was like that, and it was scary. I was like 
holy shit. Then I closed the door and not even five 
seconds later, three people came, it looked like flies, 
to the door, tu-tu-tu-tu, like they all bumped into 
it. I opened the door, rushed them in, and they came 
in and they couldn't see and I asked the guy for 
water. I said wash their faces down, and he was like 



21 
J. CHARLES 



all right, and the manager and a few other people 
started washing their faces down. 

Then more people started coming to the door 
and they started letting them in and they started 
washing their faces off. I washed one guy's face off. 
Then I told the lady, here, take over because I saw 
people -- the store now leads to the back. There's a 
back exit that leads into the building. I think the 
building we were in was 222 Broadway or 225. I'm not 
sure which one it was. 222 Broadway. So I go to the 
back and there's like 60 people in the lobby of this 
building and I'm like, Jesus Christ. I was by myself 
and I had no tech bag. The only thing I had on me was 
albuterol and a nebulizer, and unless I was going to 
blow into the nebulizer, you know, that was the extent 
of my medical care. 

So at one point I started -- I tried to get 
the crowd's attention and a guy gave me a bullhorn. He 
gives me the bullhorn and I start announcing who I was, 
that I wasn't a firefighter, because I had on a 
firefighter's jacket, I wasn't a firefighter, I was an 
EMT and that my name was Jason Charles. They're like 
okay and they started listening. Somebody had asked me 
what happened and then two other people were like, 



22 
J. CHARLES 



yeah, what happened? What happened? I was like, Jesus 
Christ, they don't even know. I was like all right. I 
was like ladies and gentlemen, Tower 2 just collapsed, 
the entire building came down, and they're like, oh, my 
God. People started crying and stuff like that. But I 
gave it to that entire crowd. They held it together. 
I wasn't like they panicked like in one of those movies 
and flipped out. They held it together. So I'm like 
okay. 

So then my next question was -- no. Someone 
had asked me can we go outside? I was like -- and then 
I know this is like really unprofessional, but then, at 
that point, I was just really aggravated. I was like 
you know what? If you want to fucking go outside, you 
know what I'm saying, and suck on that fucking dust, be 
my guest, but I suggest that you all stay in here, wait 
until it clears out in another 15, 20 minutes, and we 
can all go east towards the river and get out of here. 
They were like all right, all right. So they started 
calming down, and I was like ladies and gentlemen, does 
anybody have asthma? Like 30 people raised their 
hands. I was like, oh, Jesus Christ. So I started 
separating the asthma patients from everybody else, and 
I put the asthma patients back in the delicatessen so I 



23 
J. CHARLES 



could keep my eye on them had anybody broke out in a 
severe asthma attack. 

At one point a medic came running in through 
one of the doors covered in dust coughing and I was 
like -- and there was a guy standing behind me and I 
was like, yo, big man, take him inside the delicatessen 
and watch him. He was like all right. So he walked 
him inside. Now, I'm still taking in asthma patients. 
I mean, it was like at least 30, now it looked like 40 
because people just started popping up. So then they 
started -- they went in the delicatessen. 

Then somebody brought to my attention a chick 
who had a laceration on her head, a woman, sorry, had a 
laceration on her head, approximately 20-year-old 
African-American female, and the lac was probably maybe 
half an inch wide, it looked pretty deep, she might 
have needed stitches for it. There was a guy who was 
applying pressure to her head with a cloth, and I was 
like let me see it, and he was like, yeah, she's 
bleeding pretty badly. When he lifted it up, it wasn't 
bleeding too bad. So she was pretty much okay. So I 
told him wait here. I'm going to go back outside and 
look for a tech bag or something I could use. 

So I went back outside. At the time I had 



24 
J. CHARLES 



the bandana around my head. I took it from around my 
head and put it around my mouth. So now I'm walking 
outside and I'm asking people are they okay because now 
at this point people are just dazed. It was like one 
of those nuclear war movies where people are just in a 
daze. So I walked into a few people and I'm asking 
them are they okay, are they okay. One heavyset 
gentleman, I had to ask him, are you okay, sir? Are 
you okay? He's like, yeah, yeah, I'm all right. I 
said, listen, sir. Either walk east to the river or 
walk into that delicatessen over there. He said all 
right . 

At one point I came up to a bunch of officers 
who were sitting on the cemetery that's right there. 
They were all sitting on the wall like they couldn't 
believe what was going on. I had asked if anybody was 
hurt --no. I had said who's hurt over here? Who's 
bleeding? Because I saw blood on the floor. There was 
an officer who had little minor lacerations on his 
hand. I was like, listen, guys, you guys got to get 
out of here because Tower 1 is going to fall because 
for some reason I had just known that the tower was 
going to come down at that point because when Tower 2 
came down, the ground was actually shaking. 



25 
J. CHARLES 



So then I started walking. I got back over 
to Church and Fulton and I looked to my left and I 
could see it, but barely, a big piece of metal sticking 
into the ground. It reminded me of for some reason 
Planet of the Apes, the new one. So I looked at it and 
I was like, Jesus Christ, and I saw a Fire Marshal and 
like two detectives walk out of the dust over there, 
and they came over, you know, they came walking out. 
Before that, before I saw them walk out, I found a 
Battalion Chief's helmet, and I looked at it and picked 
it up, and I remember seeing a Battalion Chief, he 
hauled ass up the block, so he was okay. I remember 
seeing him run on Fulton before the towers came down. 
I mean, this guy was an older guy and I never seen an 
old man move so quick. So he was all right. So I took 
his helmet and I looked at it and I was like -- and I 
looked at the towers and there was debris still coming 
off the building. 

Mind you, before that, which I found a little 
weird, before the towers fell, there were a lot of 
people falling out of the building like, you know, I 
don't know, like they were just throwing themselves 
out, like they were just lined up and going, like 
paratroopers, and at one point right before the towers 



26 
J. CHARLES 



came down that stopped. It was like the people that 
were coming out just stopped coming out the window for 
whatever reason. I found that a little weird. 

As I was walking over to Tower 1 with the 
helmet in my hand, I had put it on my head. I'm like, 
you know, well, he's okay. I'm going to put this on 
and protect myself from anything falling off the 
building because I had nothing. Then I took it off 
again and I'm like, ah, I'm not going to put this back 
on my head, it's not even mine. So I'm like -- and the 
Fire Marshal, what is that? What is that in your 
hand? What are you doing with that? I'm like, okay. 
I'm like, it's a Battalion Chief's helmet. He's okay. 
He's like, give me the helmet. All right, here. I'm 
sorry, man. So I took it off because I think he had 
saw me because when I took it off and I looked behind 
me, he was already coming up, but he hadn't said 
anything. So I guess he put two and two together, you 
know what I mean. Me with a Battalion Chief's helmet 
doesn't quite look too well. So he's like, oh, and I'm 
like, listen, I'm EMS. He's like all right. 

Then a detective came up and said we're 
pulling back to Chambers. I'm like word? He's said 
yeah because Tower 1 is going to come down. He said 



27 
J. CHARLES 



the same thing. I was like all right. At that point I 
looked up at Tower 1 and I could see that she was 
leaning slightly but not much, and as I looked over 
to -- I looked at the tower, I looked at everybody else 
and everybody else is hauling -- everybody is walking 
up, walking south towards Chambers. So the officer 
offers me some water, I take it, I'm starting to drink 
it as I'm walking, and I'm walking because he said we 
got to pull back. I'm like wait a second. I still got 
those patients in the building. 

So he started -- they walked, and I ran up to 
an ESU truck. Some ESU guys were putting on Scott 
packs and I was like, yo, you guys got an extra Scott 
pack so I can go in the building and help you guys 
out? They were like -- and they started looking for 
Scott packs, and they were like, yo, we're out of Scott 
packs. So I go (inaudible)? He was like yeah. I said 
you guys going in the building, right? He said yeah. 
The only reason why I didn't go in the building because 
I had knew that the mall level was completely dust and 
for me to go in there with nothing on would have pretty 
much been suicide. So I said all right. They said go 
up the block to Broadway, there should be another ESU 
truck over there. 



J. CHARLES 

So I started back over there, and as I'm 
starting back over there, I looked down -- I think it's 
Vesey right between Tower 7 and the Trade Center and 
there were like at least four firefighters over there. 
It looked like eight, actually, because there were 
another two walking down. They were long-boarding a 
guy who must have jumped off the escalator that's like 
right there on Vesey, and they're long boarding him. 
I'm like all right. 

So I walk over to a fire truck and I take a 
sip of water that was coming out of the fire truck, and 
there was this female from England who was on the 90th 
floor of Tower 1, who told me she had just barely made 
it out of there. When the towers came down, she lost 
both her shoes. So she was walking. So I said, 
listen, I'm walking back to the building over here, you 
want to come with me? She's like yeah. I'm like all 
right. So we started walking back. She's walking 
barefoot because she lost her shoes. 

So we get back over to 222 Broadway and we 
get inside and I'm telling everybody, listen, I 
couldn't find any equipment, but we're going to have to 
get out of here because Tower 1 is going to come down. 
This sergeant, a police officer sergeant goes don't 



29 
J. CHARLES 



tell them that, don't tell them that. I'm like what? 
He was like -- I was like all right, whatever, forget 
it, then I'm not going to say it again. Then I go all 
right, ladies and gentlemen, if we're going to do this, 
we're going to get out here and we're going to walk 
east to the river, and I had said that twice, and then 
I made the mistake of saying west again and I was like 
damn. Then I said all right everybody, you know what? 
Screw it. Let's get out of here and just walk east 
now. 

As we're all walking to the back of the 
building through the freight -- not the freight -- the 
loading docks in the back of the building. We get to 
the back -- we don't even get to the back of the 
building. We start walking back there and then I heard 
a ground level explosion and I'm like holy shit, and 
then you heard that twisting metal wreckage again. 
Then I said shit and everybody started running and I 
started running behind them, and we get to the door. 
For some reason, like straight out of a movie, two 
people ran through the door together and got stuck in 
the doorway, and I'm like, oh, my God, this is not the 
time. So they squeezed through and they got through 
and I squeezed through them and ran around them because 



30 
J. CHARLES 



I just wanted to see which way the towers were 
falling . 

So I get to the loading dock and I run 
outside and there's people running out the loading dock 
east to the river like little rats out of a cage, like 
chu-chu-chu. Then I get to the loading dock outside 
and I see this 50, 60-story dust rolling down the block 
again. I'm like holy shit and I sort of moved too 
quick and fell down, and as I fall down, I look at a 
police Sergeant -- or a Captain. Sorry. He got 
covered in the dust because he didn't make it to the 
doorway in time. 

I fell down, and when I fell down, the dust 
went over my head, and I said shit and I jumped up 
gapsing for air. At that point everybody is screaming 
get the fuck out of here, and they're like close the 
gate, close the gate, and the gate was moving like a 
snail, it was closing so slow. So eight of us jumped 
on the gate and started using our weight to pull it 
down and it wouldn't budge. I remember looking over to 
my right and seeing another EMT . Naomi is her last 
name. She used to be out of Battalion 16. But I saw 
her. She was helping us pull the gate down. At one 
point someone yelled get the fuck out of here, 



31 
J. CHARLES 



everybody get the fuck out of here, go, go, go, and 
everybody is yelling. It wasn't that yell like, you 
know, that roller coaster yell or you're yelling at 
somebody to discipline them. It was like that 
horrifying scream that everybody was relaying back and 
forward. 

So everybody started hauling ass out of 
there, and I jumped back onto the deck and I'm like 
everybody get the fuck out of here and everybody is 
running. I must have been like the last person out of 
the room, and by the time I decided to get out of the 
room, being the last person out, the room was 
completely -- I mean the loading dock was completely 
dusty. It was like a fog. You couldn't see anything 
but the light that was illuminating the room. 

So I got back into the lobby and the lobby 
was dusty and I'm like shit, I'm going to suffocate in 
here. I started panicking because I couldn't breathe 
and it was heavily dust to the side. You could see 
each other but you couldn't breathe. Now I'm panicking 
and everybody else is like looking for somewhere to 
breathe, and I remember sticking my face between an 
elevator door, like the elevator shaft, to try to get 
some air, and that wasn't working and I'm like shit, 



32 
J. CHARLES 



I'm going to die in here now, suffocating, and then 
somebody passed me a wet rag. I put the wet rag on my 
face and I was able to breathe again. So I'm like all 
right, cool. 

Then the same sergeant who told me not to 
tell anybody the towers were coming down, he asked me, 
you think we could die from this dust? I'm like right 
now? No. But eventually? Yes. He's like okay. So 
then we're all looking for a way out. So now the dust 
started to come down a little quicker than it did last 
time. So I walked outside and I'm just like, Jesus 
Christ. I couldn't even see. Particles were hitting 
me in my face. I'm like let me go back inside. 

I went back inside and at one point I 
remember I saw a bunch of people run down to the lower 
levels of the building. So I started running down to 
the lower levels of the building and I see all these 
people in there. I went back upstairs to look for a 
Lieutenant -- a Captain, actually. I said, listen, 
Captain, I got like 60 people in this building. This 
is before Tower 1 came down. Sorry. This is before 
Tower 1 came down. I had told the Captain I had 60 
people in the building. He said, listen, I'm going 
over to -- what's that around where the Liberty boats, 



33 
J. CHARLES 



the boats to the Liberty. 

Q. To Ellis Island? 

A. No. Where the boats leave from Manhattan 
over to Ellis Island. He said he was going to be -- 

Q. The ferry terminal. 

A. Thank you. He was going over to the ferry 
terminal and he was like you're on your own and he left 
me. I was like okay. That's when I started looking 
for a tech bag and stuff. That was before Tower 1 came 
down. So anyway, I ran into another -- I ran into a 
Lieutenant. He says I'm going to South Ferry. You can 
stay here if you want. I was like all right, that's 
two for two, you know what I'm saying? (inaudible) I 
understood that they were scared. So it wasn't like I 
could say anything behind him. So I was like all 
right, I guess it's up to me. 

So I went back over to Broadway and Fulton at 
that point and I just knew both the towers were down. 
You couldn't see anything, but you just knew they were 
down. There was no shadow or nothing. So it was like 
I went back into the building and I said screw it, let 
me start evacuating the building. So I started going 
down to the lower levels and I ended up in the gym of 
the building, the nicest gym I've ever seen in an 



34 
J. CHARLES 



office building. There were like eight guys in there 
and they're like what's going on? I mean, they were 
like what's going on but like is anybody leaving the 
building yet? I'm like, listen, you've got to go 
upstairs to Duane Reade -- because as a matter of fact, 
before I went downstairs, I heard all this commotion 
and I'm hearing voices and shit and I'm like anybody 
still in there? I went back to the loading docks 
because I heard the commotion because it's an area 
where you can go down to the basement levels before you 
go to the loading docks, and I heard all this commotion 
in that area and I couldn't for my life figure out 
where it was coming from. So I went up to the loading 
docks, I yelled again, no one responded. As I'm 
walking back to the lobby area, I see a crack and I see 
people moving around and I go what's that? Oh, shit, 
that's Duane Reade, and I'm like -- you know, there's 
people being handed wet rags with water by the 
Lieutenant and he's telling everybody to walk east. 

Q. Is this a PD Lieutenant or an EMS Lieutenant? 

A. EMS Lieutenant. 

Q. An EMS Lieutenant. 

A. An EMS Lieutenant. He's giving people water 
and a wet rag and telling them to go east to the river, 



35 
J. CHARLES 



go east to the river. So everybody, you know, they're 
walking east. I'm like, Lieutenant, Charles, 5114, 
Battalion 13. He's like all right. He said 
something. He said we're going to get everybody else 
out of here. I went all right. So that's when I made 
the decision to go -- 

Q. Do you remember who that Lieutenant was? 

A. No. I couldn't remember for my life who he 
was. But I remember going back to the basement levels 
to get everybody else out because I knew there was 
people still downstairs. So I wound up in the gym. 
Those guys had a TV set and that's when I found out we 
were under attack, because prior to that I thought 
Tower 2 blew up because the engine from the plane hit 
Tower 2 and exploded inside. It was like stupid, but 
that's what I thought. Then that's when I knew we were 
under attack. So I sat there for like 10, 15 minutes, 
looking at the TV set, and then I was drinking some 
more water and I was like crazy dehydrated because the 
bike ride alone wore me out, you know, my legs were 
just complete rubber. 

So now I'm drinking water and at this point 
I'm with the EMT, Naomi. So we're getting everybody 
else out of the building. So we got those guys out the 



36 
J. CHARLES 



gym, then I started going lower than that and started 
getting people out of the office. At one point I went 
to an office and people were still working. I'm like 
get the hell out of here. What the hell are you guys 
doing? They're like okay, you know, they're locking up 
their stuff. I'm like go. Don't worry about that 
shit. They're like all right. 

So then I had started walking through the 
lower levels looking for more people and ran into a 
maintenance room, which was like the best luck in the 
world because I found boots, because at the time I had 
Sketcher shoes on and those weren't doing me -- they 
did me good running from the towers, but after that I 
needed something heavy-duty. So I found -- and like, 
you know, which was the luckiest thing in the world, 
size 13, which are like the hardest shoes to find. So 
I found those, I put those on, and I started -- me and 
Naomi and another guy, the maintenance guy, we started 
walking back. So we walked back upstairs. We walked 
back upstairs and we started telling people get out of 
here. So then I told Naomi, you know, listen, get out 
of here, you know what I'm saying? She's like nah, 
nah, I'd rather stick with you. I'm like okay, cool. 
So we stuck together for like at least an hour. At 



37 
J. CHARLES 



this point I was just like walking around on the 
streets because there was nothing else to do. 

So now we went into a building. At one point 
I went into a building and I ran into a few PD 
officers, they were like just sitting in there. I 
don't know what building it was, but it was next to J&R 
Music World. So we get into J&R Music -- I mean the 
building next to J&R Music World and they're talking 
and I overhear the cop telling everybody, yeah, it came 
over the radio that one of the planes are heading 
towards the Trade Center and that one of the planes 
were already hijacked. I'm like, to myself, I'm like, 
damn, they heard all this report of they hit the 
buildings . How come no one tried to evacuate the 
buildings in time? Whatever. At that point, I didn't 
know how many people died in the buildings neither, but 
I knew there were people in there. So we're chatting 
and stuff and then all right, whatever. So I leave 
them. 

So now, a guy, a detective, for some reason 
lost his shirt, so he's like shirtless. So I ran back 
into the building to get him a T-shirt that was in the 
gym downstairs. I get the T-shirt, I run back 
upstairs, and he was gone. He moved. So then now me 



J. CHARLES 

and the detectives, we're bringing up T-shirts and 
sweat pants and stuff like that from the gym level 
because we knew that there was going to be some 
half-naked people running around, you know, cut, 
severely cut or whatever and we could use a lot of that 
stuff as bandages and tourniquets and stuff. So we 
brought most of that stuff upstairs and we put it in 
the lobby of the building. We took the Gatorade from 
the Duane Reade and stuff, we put it in the lobby of 
the building, 222 Broadway, and we left it there. 

So I went back outside and I saw two 
firefighters like sitting on the ground. It looked 
like they were just winded, like that was it for them, 
they weren't going to do anything else. One was 
Oriental and a white guy sitting together. I went back 
outside. I ran into another EMS Lieutenant, I don't 
know who he was, and I was with him for the better part 
of the day, until I left. I never got his name or 
anything. But at that point he told me to go to this 
bus. They had a city bus with all EMS equipment on it, 
like the defibrillator, oxygen and all that stuff. 

So I got on there and a paramedic was like do 
you need some oxygen? Do you want some oxygen? It 
looks like you need some oxygen. I'm said I'm all 



39 
J. CHARLES 



right, I'm all right. He's like here, take some of 
this, it's free. I'm like all right. So I started 
breathing on the -- I took some 02 because I had a bad 
headache at that point and oxygen was doing nothing for 
me, so I put it down and I took it off. The Lieutenant 
was like, all right, we're going to go over to 225 
Broadway, the building right next to the Duane Reade. 

So we all grabbed some stuff and we lugged it 
over. We get into the building. We get to the 
building, actually. We didn't even get in the building 
yet because for some reason they wanted to get into 
Duane Reade. As opposed to walking right into 225 
Broadway, they cut Duane Reade open and they used Duane 
Reade as like -- you know, because they had all the 
medical equipment and they had peroxide and alcohol and 
stuff like that. So if we get in there -- we could go 
in there just to cut into the building. 

So now we're setting up triage in the 
building. They're setting up saline bags and sodium 
chloride and stuff, they're hanging them up. They had 
a nice little triage center going on. It looked like a 
little hospital. So at one point I disappeared because 
I needed to get some Tylenol. I got me an Excedrin 
from Duane Reade and popped two of those and the 



40 
J. CHARLES 



headache went away. All right. 

So at that point now, we were just waiting 
for patients and nobody was coming in. It was like, 
you know. Then we ran into another Lieutenant, 
Lieutenant Davis. I think he's from Battalion 4, if 
I'm not mistaken. 

(Tape side two.) 

-- towers and I heard six loud explosions, 
and those six loud explosions changed my mind real 
quick and I went back over to the triage center and it 
was like you know what? Let me wait here. I had no 
helmet. I had nothing that would have protected me 
from anything that hit me in my head. So I stayed 
where I was at. 

I remember at one point, I'm not pretty sure 
what point it was, I ran over to a hardware shop that 
the Fire Department had broken into to use a lot of the 
masks that they had in there. They had the Scott pack 
masks, and I found a Scott pack mask that was laying 
there because a firefighter had took a new one and I 
grabbed his and I put filters in it and I used that to 
breathe with and see because the dust was just messing 
my eyes up. 

So I went back over to 225 Broadway and I was 



41 
J. CHARLES 



sitting in there, and now at that point we're just all 
talking, can't believe what's going on. At one point, 
amongst -- it was three EMTs and two paramedics that I 
can remember -- four paramedics. Two were HAZTAC and 
two weren't. It was just quiet and we were just 
sitting there waiting, and then me and another EMS guy, 
EMT, we were just like, yo, we can't just sit here and 
do nothing. So me and him, I never got his name 
neither, but me and him grabbed a tech bag and we just 
went outside. So we started heading over to where 
Building 7 was at and they were like Building 7 is 
going to collapse, you can't go over there, this and 
that, and there was another building that they thought 
was going to collapse that was like right behind the 
triage center, the building that we were in. So we 
started walking around. 

At one point I was like -- at one point I 
almost broke down because I had thought my father was 
dead because he responded to the '93 bombing and he's a 
Port Authority cop, like I said before. He responded 
to the '93 bombing. He was on West Street in front of 
the tower. So I thought he might have been over 
there. So I said, if anything, I'm going to walk over 
there, try and work my way over there and look for 



42 
J. CHARLES 



him. So I'm going -- like I started walking towards 
Chambers now to look for him because I'm looking for a 
Port Authority cop and I knew that that's where 
everybody pulled back to, which was Chambers. 

So I started working my way over there and I 
run into a group of police officers who were sitting in 
front of BMCC, BMCC ' s garden. There's a garden and 
then there's an apartment complex and that's where they 
were sitting. So we had a conversation. They had no 
idea -- they knew what was going on, but they didn't 
know how bad it was over there. So I started telling 
them what was going and they were like, Jesus Christ. 

As I started walking back over to Chambers, 
going south again to Chambers, because we were a little 
north of Chambers where we ran into the police 
officers, I started walking -- me and the EMT started 
walking south, I had ran into a firefighter. I think, 
if I'm not mistaken, he said Engine 9 or Ladder 9. 
That's where I got that from. He was looking for his 
boys and he couldn't find any of them and he had 
nothing on, only his bunker pants, and he looked 
totally bent out of shape. It was like at the time it 
didn't even occur to me to help him and look for his 
guys because I didn't know so many firefighters had 



43 
J. CHARLES 



died in the towers like that. Then anyway, I was 
really concerned about looking for my father. 

So I went back off and then I ran into Pete 
Rosie. I forgot what unit he was on. But I ran into 
him and he was glad to see me, I was glad to see him, 
it was a face that I recognized. So we started talking 
a little bit. We talked. I gave him some Excedrins 
because he had a bad headache, too. 

So we walked, me and the EMT now, we walked 
over to West Street and Chambers where they had like 
all the EMS and firefighters and everybody was just 
there waiting, and I ran into Jerry Toyloy of Battalion 
13. I ran into him. We were talking a little bit. I 
ran into another EMS guy from our station, but I forgot 
who he was. Then I started looking for my father 
again . 

I ran into a carload of Port Authority cops. 
I jump in front of the car and almost got hit, and they 
stopped and they were like, you know, they looked at me 
like what the -- you know what I'm saying? I'm saying 
you guys know Rudy Charles? They were like, yeah, 
you're his son, right? I said yeah. You seen him? 
They were like, yeah, he's probably still over there in 
Jersey. I was like all right, all right, that makes 



44 
J. CHARLES 



sense. Keep the older guys over there and bring in the 
new guys . So I found out he was okay and my day was a 
lot better. So at that point now it was just about 
helping anybody who came out. 

For at least three, four hours after that, 
there was just nothing to do. The triage center we 
were in had to be evacuated because they were pretty 
sure that building was going to come down into it. So 
we all moved over to Pace University. At that point 
there was just nothing but cops. I don't know why 
there were court officers over there. It didn't even 
make sense that the court officers were there. This is 
my opinion. But they were there like just milling 
around. Cops, firefighters, everybody was just helping 
out bringing all the equipment over to Pace 
University. Then they had an even better triage center 
set up over there. They had like little beds and 
stuff. At that point I ran into a few EMTs I 
recognized. I went into Salguera from 16. Let's see. 
Who else did I run into? That was it. Then I ran into 
a few fire cadet buddies that I graduated with 
throughout the day and that was pretty much it. 

At one point, I think it was Lieutenant 
David, he had said -- it was around 7:00 o'clock at 



45 



J. CHARLES 



night. He had said for us to go home because they 
weren't going to pull anybody out, and I knew they 
weren't going to pull anybody out alive, but just in 
case they had a flood of bodies they were going to pull 
out, I could help. But at that point I was just very 
drained, pissed off, upset, sad, scared. It was like 
you know what? 

So then I went back to my bike. I went back 
to my bike, which was on Dey, and she was completely a 
mess. Her tires were burnt off. She was completely 
dusted. So I took the chain off and I lugged her up -- 
I put the bike on my back and I started walking towards 
Chambers, and I ran into a firefighter, who questioned 
me about the fire jacket I had on. He had looked at me 
and he was like what are you doing with that jacket? 
I'm like I'm EMS. He's like, oh, okay. I'm like you 
think I'd be stealing a bike at a time like this? He 
goes, it's not the bike I'm worried about. 



Prior to that I did break open a command car 
just for -- you know, if anybody wondered why 
(inaudible) . I broke into a command car. I had asked 



46 
J. CHARLES 



a firefighter at one point to open it up for me. I 
asked him for an ax or a Halligan tool. He was like, 
well, who are you? I was like I work for EMS. He was 
like you got any ID? Just the way he said it pissed me 
off, so I didn't even show him ID. I walked away. I 
go over to a police officer and I go, guys, can you do 
me a favor and open up the command car for me? Without 
any questions asked, ID or anything like that, he went 
over to the command car, busted the glass open, and we 
got all the equipment out of there like that. 

There were few little triage centers, as a 
matter of fact, throughout the day that were like set 
up that started being shut down and moved to a bigger 
triage center. I found out there was one in Liberty 
Plaza. So throughout the day I was just helping 
collect equipment. I was carrying the tanks, the 
oxygen tanks. The crate holds, I think, ten, twelve, 
and I carried like one of those a whole block before I 
decided I wasn't superman because those things are 
heavy. I asked for help and carried it the rest of the 
way. But before I would have to go home, I had to take 
that bike on my back and walk from -- at that point I 
was where Pace University was at -- all the way to 
Canal Street carrying the bike on my back, and that was 



47 
J. CHARLES 



pretty much it. 

I got home -- I got to 28th Street and I 
remember people just looking at me like, Jesus Christ, 
look at him, like they couldn't believe it. I went 
into a funeral parlor because they had a TV on and they 
were showing all this stuff that happened, and I had 
never actually seen the planes go into the towers 
because when I was in the gym, at the point when I was 
in the gym, I just heard we were under attack and that 
the Pentagon was hit and the Trade Center and 
Pennsylvania. But I didn't see the plane go into the 
building until I got into the funeral parlor like hours 
later, and I sat with them and they were like, oh, my 
God, you were down there? They're like, yo, you want 
some water? You want something to eat? You know what 
I mean? That felt good that they acknowledged me like 
that. I'm like no, don't worry about that. I just 
want to watch this real quick. 

Then I got home, back to my at the time 
girlfriend, now wife. I got home and she was crying. 
I got home and my parents had thought I was dead 
because my mother is in Florida and my father, he was 
in Jersey. My brother decides to go to sleep at 9:00 
o'clock, so he didn't know what was going on until 3:00 



48 
J. CHARLES 



o'clock in the afternoon. He woke up to my mother 
yelling over the answering machine. He jumps up and he 
knew something was wrong because the way she was 
yelling. He goes over to the answering machine, 14 
back-to-back messages. So he started listening to 
them. My wife had called. They were looking for me. 
Everybody was looking for me and my father, and they 
had knew my father was okay because that call came in 
at 2:00 o'clock, but they hadn't received a call from 
me until like 5:00, 6:00 o'clock. So they thought I 
was dead and my mother is making prayer and they're 
like, well, if he's gone, he went to hell. I'm like 
okay. 

So after everything was said and done, I had 
to report back to work here the next day. I called my 
Lieutenant. I said I was off at 8:00. He said, well, 
you have to come back at 8:00 o'clock in the morning. 
I thought to myself the hell I am, you know what I'm 
saying? At that point everything started hitting me. 
It was just like it started to bother me and I just got 
really sad and depressed. I got back into work 
eventually about like 4:00 o'clock in the afternoon the 
next day, but I wasn't rushing back in because I was so 
tired and drained and it was like -- and to be honest 



49 
J. CHARLES 



with you, I should have never left that day. I should 
have just stayed there until I passed out of exhaustion 
or something. I shouldn't have left because I was 
tired that day and those guys who stayed there like two 
weeks straight and I went home. So that's the only 
thing I felt guilty about. If anything I felt guilty, 
it was that. I mean, it was just like the worst day in 
everybody's lives. I mean, I couldn't believe it. 

I remember what pissed me off going home was 
the fact that everybody was like laughing and looking 
like they were going out to the bars and still eating 
in diners. I'm like I know people are supposed to go 
on, but that was to me a little too soon. People were 
out there laughing in the streets and then there's 
laughing and they stopped to look at me like, oh, my 
God, look at him, look at his bike. It was weird. 

That's pretty much it. I mean, anything else 
that will come to mind, I'm trying to write a little 
scripture about everything I went through that day. 
So, of course, stuff like that will come back to me 
later. I guess that's pretty much it. 

Q. Okay. Is there anything you'd like to add to 
this interview? 

A. No, not really. 



50 
J. CHARLES 



MR. ECCLESTON: The interview is being 
concluded at 2212. The counter on the recorder is 
775. 



File No. 9110494 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

EMT EDWARD MARTINEZ 

Interview Date: January 24, 2002 



Transcribed by Elisabeth F. Nason 



E. MARTINEZ 

MR. RADENBERG: Today is January 24, 2002. 
I'm Paul Radenberg of the Fire Department's World 
Trade Center Task Force. The time is now 1303 
hours. I'm currently at EMS Battalion 17. 
Q. I'm conducting an interview with -- 
A. Eddie Martinez of Battalion 17, EMT . Eddie 
Martinez . 

Q. Okay. This interview is regarding the events 
of September 11, 2001. Eddie could you start from -- 

A. All right. On September 11, we were 
dispatched to the World Trade Center for an MCI, a mass 
casualty incident. It was in the morning. We didn't 
know what was going on. All we knew was that on the 
news a plane had crashed into the World Trade Center. 
So we headed down there. We headed down towards the 
towers . 

We took the FDR down, which was closed off to 
traffic. They had a special lane for the emergency 
vehicles, so we made good time getting down there. 
Once we were dispatched to Vesey and West Street, Vesey 
and West Street, upon entering the area, what we saw 
was like a total devastation from, I guess from the 
first plane that struck the tower. There were burnt 
cars. We saw -- it was like a grayish -- it was 



E. MARTINEZ 

night. It was sunlight. There was a lot of light. It 
was a sunny clear day, but in that area it was a 
grayish area. The sun wasn't shining. It was like 
fog, like a big fog. 

We saw, like I said, burned vehicles, some of 
them were on fire. The buildings were just destroyed. 
The surroundings, there was too much for the eyes to 
capture everything all at once. It was like 
overwhelming . 

We were told to go to our staging area, which 
we attempted to do, then we would reverse back up. I 
don't know the street that we were on at that time, at 
that moment. Everything looked the same. I was the 
tech. My partner was driving at the time. 

Coming out of the -- getting out of the 
ambulance to get the equipment to go to where our 
staging area was supposed to be, I commented to my 
partner that there were some burnt parts on the floor, 
which turned out to be flesh that were strewn all 
around the place. Everywhere you looked you see a 
piece of something. At the time I didn't know what it 
was until I came close to it. I saw it was a piece of 
flesh. 

At that time we just -- they told my partner 



E. MARTINEZ 

to turn the ambulance around and they had a new staging 
area, which was further away from the building, and we 
just made a U turn and went up, not that far from where 
we originally were assigned to and once we were there, 
we were -- I started taking the equipment out of the 
ambulance and I told my partner that I will see him in 
a little while with the first patient. 

Well, he stood with the ambulance and I put 
all the equipment on the stretcher and put my gear on, 
my helmet and my coat, and headed down towards the 
towers. I was in front of the towers. I had walked a 
little distance, some distance from the ambulance, and 
I was attending a patient, somebody was hurt, it was on 
the ground. There were other patients all around, but 
this one was -- he was hurt. 

I was talking to him when I heard a loud, 
like a roaring noise, like a loud loud roaring noise. 
At the time I didn't know what it was. I just looked 
up. All I could see because of the fog that was there, 
you couldn't see above. Your distance was limited. 
Once I heard that, I heard like a big explosion, a 
tremendous explosion, let me put it that way and a 
rumbling sound. 

At that time I started seeing things coming 



E. MARTINEZ 

down. I attempted to grab -- I grabbed the person that 
I was talking to and to get away from that area, but he 
slipped back down and at that time everything started 
coming down. So I attempted to run some distance, 
which I couldn't run, because it overtook me. Like I 
said, it happened like really quick. 

I also felt myself airborne. I was 
airborne. I didn't get that far. I was airborne. I 
felt a force behind me and it slammed me down on the 
ground. I got slapped down on the ground. Everything 
started hitting me, whatever was falling. At the time 
I didn't know what it was. I thought maybe that the 
building that was on fire exploded. I didn't know. I 
found out later on that the second plane had hit 
another building, the second tower. 

When I fell, I fell forward and with my hands 
extended. I still was getting bombarded with a lot of 
heavy whatever it was hitting me, concrete, whatever. 
I was getting hit hard and when I fell on the floor 
that I fell with my -- on my stomach, face down with my 
hands extended, something heavy fell on my hand and 
bounced off. At that time my arm was broken. 

I also felt some sharp pains to my back and 
then I was inside some -- a dark cloud of smoke. It 



E. MARTINEZ 

was so dark you couldn't see your hand. It was 
choking. It was like choking smoke. At that time, I 
had no idea where I was. I didn't hear no voices. I 
heard nothing. It was total silence. 

I'm trying to find my way out of there with 
my broken arm. Holding on to my broken arm with the 
pain in my back, I just started walking in the 
direction that I fell, because I knew if I turned 
around I would lose my way, so I continued in that 
direction. It seemed like forever that I was in 
there. I didn't know -- it felt like it was walking in 
like suspended animation, that's what it felt like. 

I continued walking and I heard some -- a 
voice, because I kept yelling is there anybody here, is 
there anybody here. I just kept walking and I heard a 
voice that just kept saying follow the light. I saw 
the light through the thick smoke. The light was like 
at a distance, but it was clear enough -- it was light. 
It was a bright light. It was clear enough to follow 
it. 

So I continued following it. It wasn't -- as 
I was following it, I remember I felt a lot of heat. I 
didn't know what that was at the time. I got out of 
-- I started seeing -- it was like a haze. I saw 



E. MARTINEZ 

-- it was a vehicle that was burnt up and when I got 
out of the smoke there was nobody around. Nobody with 
a light, nothing. There was nobody around. It was 
just total silence. 

I walked a short distance and I saw Karen, 
that was one of the paramedics from my old station. I 
saw her. I came over to her and told her that I was 
hurt. At that time they got me, put me inside 
-- helped me over to an ambulance. I told them my arm 
was broken. At that time they checked my back and they 
found that I had a deep laceration to my back. I 
couldn't breathe on my right side. My left was okay, I 
felt air going through. But my right side was like -- 
I was having problems, a lot of problems breathing. 

At this time they splinted my arm and they 
checked my back. They told me that I have a deep 
laceration to my back and they thought that I may have 
what they call a pneumothorax. Turned out, lucky for 
me, that I didn't have a pneumothorax, but I did have a 
lot of shrapnel inside my back. That's what was 
hurting me. 

They were attempting to take care of my back, 
when one of the other medics that was on the scene -- 
he was leery about the place, because there was no safe 



E. MARTINEZ 

area at this time. There was a lot going on. There 
was a lot of noise. I remember hearing still a lot of 
noise. I don't know if things were still falling, but 
all of a sudden we heard another rumbling sound and 
again with the smoke, you saw the smoke coming down and 
everybody just ran towards safety. 

I ran into, I don't remember the place I ran 
into. I know I ran into a place that once I got 
inside, there was total -- there was a lot of smoke 
inside and a lot of people were every which way. They 
were going every direction. Nobody knew where to go or 
what direction to go. 

I saw a woman there and she was like frozen 
with fear, I guess it was. So I went over to her and I 
tried to help her out. I tried to comfort her and 
telling her that everything is going to be okay, just 
calm down, because she was like almost hysterical, so I 
was taking care of her for a little while until I 
couldn't do it any more. I just like, I felt myself 
getting -- my breathing was getting worse. It wasn't 
getting any better. 

So then at some -- I don't know who it was 
inside. I asked them if they had any oxygen and there 
were some EMTs, I guess from a volunteer ambulance 



E. MARTINEZ 

corps. They came over and I got an oxygen mask on me. 
At that time they checked my back and his reaction was 
like, you have like a big laceration to your back. 

My main concern at that time, although my 
back was hurting and I was short of breath, because of 
all that smoke that I inhaled, my arm had been 
splinted. I was holding my arm as a matter of fact, 
the splint wasn't holding, so I was just holding my 
arm. 

But that woman just kept -- I didn't want 
nothing to happen to her. It was like, you know, a 
woman in her 50s or something, somewhere around there. 
So I -- she was more calm. I talked to her for a 
little while. She seemed much better. Then some 
medical personnel I think came over and I told them and 
they took her. 

Then at that time they started running inward 
towards -- further into the building that I was in, 
because they thought that the building was going to 
collapse outside. I had no idea what was going on 
outside. I didn't know that a plane had struck. All I 
knew was that I was hurt. I said no, I'm not going 
further into this building. As a matter of fact, I 
want to go out of the building, because this is an 



10 
E. MARTINEZ 



unsafe area here. 

I remember going out and it seemed like I 
walked for, I don't know how long a distance, because 
there were no blocks any more. It was just one big 
road, one big mess. I just continued walking and 
people were -- I remember two ESU cops, I think it was, 
grabbed me, because I was already too weak to go any 
further. I couldn't. I felt like I was going to pass 
out . 

During the time that I got hit, when I was 
airborne, when I got slammed on the floor, I remember 
my initial reaction was to stay awake and don't pass 
out. I just kept repeating it to myself. Just don't 
pass out, stay awake, stay conscious and thank God, I 
did. I never lost consciousness throughout the whole 
thing . 

At one time I couldn't get up. I couldn't 
get up, because I was being bombarded with whatever was 
hitting me and finally when it stopped, it just seemed 
like hours. It was probably just minutes or seconds. 
I finally got up. That's when I felt the pain in my 
back and I knew my arm was broken, because I felt it 
break . 

They took me, I went to -- I remember seeing 



11 



E. MARTINEZ 



the cops coming over and I'm telling them that I feel 
like I can't go on any more and I was ready to fall. 
They grabbed me and they helped me away from that 
area. They put me on a boat that was going to Jersey 
City. That's where I ended up, in Jersey City Medical 
Center . 

I remember coming out of that building that I 
was in and I saw a burnt ambulance, which later on they 
told me that our ambulance was burnt up. I don't know 
if that's the actual ambulance that I saw. All I know 
is I saw a lot of destruction all around the place; 
fire trucks and a lot of people that were hurt. 

I was put on the boat along with some other 
firefighters that were there and taken to Jersey City 
Medical Center and they told me -- 



12 
E. MARTINEZ 



My partner, I wondered about him. He went in 
a -- I didn't see him. I was worried for him. When 
everything started coming down, I remember that he was 
with the ambulance. I didn't see him until two days 
later at the hospital. I had no idea what had happened 
to him. I asked some of the people about him. Nobody 
knew anything. Nobody had no information. All they 
knew -- well, everybody was in the same state that I 
was, in a confused state. Not knowing what had 
happened. 

It wasn't until like two days later, because 
I was heavily sedated and on morphine, that I started 
-- they told me that the second plane had hit the 
building and that I was caught in the collapse of the 
building. 4 days later I was released from the 
hospital. I was there, yes, 4 days. Continued therapy 
until now. (inaudible) . 

Q. Okay. Do you remember roughly -- you had 
seen or heard on the news about the first plane 
hitting, right? 

A. I saw -- I didn't hear anything about it 



13 
E. MARTINEZ 



until around -- well, I knew that the first -- I knew 
there was a plane crash into the World towers . I 
didn't know what kind of plane it was. I thought it 
was maybe years ago that a plane hit the -- 

Q. Empire State Building? 

A. Empire State Building. I thought it was a 
small plane, but I remember when we were going down 
towards the World Trade Center we were on the FDR 
Drive. I saw -- we got a clear view. I said this 
wasn't a small plane. This was bigger than I thought. 
Then later on was when I found out that it was a 747, 
or whatever, that hit that. I didn't know and like two 
days later is when they told me. I didn't watch the 
news until I got out of the hospital, until three days 
later. I didn't want to hear about the news, the 
newspapers or anything. 

Q. Who was your partner that day? 

A. Benny Badillo. 

Q. When you arrived at the scene, you said you 
came first to Vesey and West? 

A. Yes. 

Q. When you got there, do you remember any other 
EMS personnel down there at that point, any officers 
that you recognized, or techs, medics? 



14 
E. MARTINEZ 



A. There were other ambulances from different 
agencies down there. I didn't recognize anybody 
offhand. Like I said, I was like following -- it was 
just overwhelming, what I was looking at. I saw other 
emergency medical personnel. I saw some PD and 
firefighters around, but I didn't recognize anybody 
that I knew, until after I came out of the smoke. 
That's when Karen -- she blurted out like -- I don't 
want to say because you had an interview. You have 
this interview. 

She was surprised that it was me and I 
recognized her and her partner -- I don't remember her 
partner's name. That's when I recognized her and they 
took a hold of me. I walked over to them. 

Q. When they had you move or had your partner 
move the bus, do you remember where or what direction 
the bus got moved? 

A. I know, I believe he was facing towards the 
towers, because we went up -- we went like down, seemed 
like a little hill. We were going down and they told 
us move the ambulance away from the area. They had a 
new staging area because that staging area was unsafe, 
which I was glad that we moved, because anything there 
got demolished, where we were before. 



15 



E. MARTINEZ 



So we made a U turn, went back like up a 
hill, not that far a distance, and it was facing the 
towers with the ambulance facing the towers and that's 
when I took all the equipment out, I told him I will 
see you later with the first patient and I walked down 
towards the tower. I was right in front of it when all 
that started happening. I remember (inaudible) . I 
didn't know where he was. I lost him completely. 

Q. Okay. Anything else that you would like to 
add or comment on? 



16 



E. MARTINEZ 



MR. RADENBERG: Okay. The time is now 1327, 
This will be the conclusion of the interview. 



File No. 9110495 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
EMT BENJAMIN BADILLO 
Interview Date: January 24, 2002 



Transcribed by Elisabeth F. Nason 



B. BADILLO 

MR. RADENBERG: Today is January 24, 2002. 

I'm Paul Radenberg of the Fire Department's World 

Trade Center Task Force. Currently at EMS 

Battalion 17. The time is now 1410. 

Q. I'm conducting an interview with -- 

A. Benjamin Badillo, EMT . 

Q. Mr. Badillo is assigned to EMS Battalion 17. 
This interview is regarding the events of September 11, 
2001. 

A. All right. Prior to getting the assignment, 
we had just came off another assignment. We were 
located at 176 Street and Morris Avenue in the Bronx. 
When we went available they told us to switch to 
Citywide frequency and to go downtown and then after 
that, all the information came in via the computer. 
So we started going downtown. I took the 
Cross Bronx, no, I took the Deegan down the FDR, and on 
the way down there, they were just -- when we got close 
enough, I don't remember at what point we were at, but 
you could see the World Trade Center on fire and all 
kinds of things happening. 

I was pretty much horrified as well as my 
partner. I couldn't believe it was actually happening 
or that we were even going down there. You see things 



B. BADILLO 

like that on the news and stuff like that, but you 
don't expect to be in it. 

So we are driving down the FDR, I was 
driving. My partner was just navigating at this 
point. We take the Battery Park tunnel and come up -- 
go under and come back around to West Street. We 
parked -- we got up to the World Trade Center. We got 
to -- it was right here somewhere. I know it was right 
before Vesey, pedestrian -- okay. We were between the 
two towers, so we made a U turn and parked on West 
Street right over here. 

Q. By Liberty, just north of Liberty? 
A. Yes, just north of liberty. At that point, 
we were being directed by a staging officer. I don't 
remember his name. We started getting our equipment 
together, on to the stretcher and everything. Helmet, 
jackets, everything we had we put on the stretcher. So 
as we started to go to the triage area, the staging 
officer told my partner, Eddie Martinez, to take all of 
the equipment, including the stretcher and everything 
to triage and the driver had to stay with the vehicle. 
So I stayed with the vehicle and that's pretty much the 
last I saw of Eddie that day. 

Eddie walked with all the equipment around 



B. BADILLO 

the first -- second building, right between the two 
towers and that was the last I saw of him. So I was 
standing by the vehicle. I am looking around and I see 
cars just -- a couple of cars, not much at this point, 
destroyed and I could see some bodies right before we 
parked, between the two buildings, laying around in the 
street and right near our vehicle you could see -- I 
didn't know what it was at first. Then I'm looking at 
it and it was just body parts, just chunks of flesh you 
know, just spread out here and there. That was a 
little freaky. I have never seen anything like that. 

I don't remember what time we got down 
there. I know it was a little after nine. Maybe 10 
after nine, 15 after nine. It was around there. I 
don't remember exactly. I know the first flight had 
hit. I don't know if the second airliner had hit at 
that point. So I'm just sitting around at this point. 
I really didn't have anything to do but just wait. 

About 5 minutes after just sitting there, I 
hear this really bad thundering sound. I didn't know 
what it was. It just sounded like thunder, but it was 
like different. When I look up into the sky, out of 
curiosity, I don't know what made me look, I could see 
the top of the building coming down. I paused for 



B. BADILLO 

about a second or two. 

When I took my eyes off the building and back 
to the ground, I could see officers and a lot of people 
just running into the building, so I did the same 
thing, like any reasonable person would do, trying to 
save their own life. I ran inside -- I don't know if 
it was the Marriott Hotel or -- I don't know if the 
Marriott is shown in here. 

Q. I believe it's in here. It used to be the 
Vista . 

A. Yes, I don't remember if it was the Marriott 
or the building right next to it, because there were 
two buildings right near to each other. But as soon as 
I ran into the building, I took a right. I was just 
trying to get as deep into the building as I could in 
the lobby. A few officers ran in there and civilians 
ran in there with us . 

As soon as I made the right, I tried to hide 
under a security desk and you could just hear 
everything came down. As soon as everything came down, 
the lobby and the lights -- the lobby filled up with 
smoke and debris. The lights went off. You couldn't 
see anything. It was completely dark. It was a really 
loud noise. I can't even describe it. But it was a 



B. BADILLO 

really really horrific nasty noise. 

As soon as that happened, I couldn't 
breathe. It's like the next breath I took was full of 
smoke and debris. I know I wasn't like not breathing 
for a long time. I would say about 30 seconds to maybe 
a minute. I was very scared. I couldn't breathe out. 
I couldn't take a breath. I felt all that debris every 
time I took a deep breath, going deeper into my lungs. 

After a little bit, I finally took a breath 
and I was able to breathe a little easier, but it was 
still burning a lot. I couldn't see anything. I was 
really frightened at this point. Luckily some of the 
officers had flashlights so we found our way. 

As we made our way back out to the lobby, 
there was some light at the outer part of the lobby. 
There was a light there. I still wasn't too sure about 
where we were at. At this point, I called my friend 
Maurice Lewis, he is also an EMT here at Battalion 17. 
I told him to contact my fiance and my family and tell 
them where I was at and to go home and try to calm 
down . 

I looked -- the phones weren't working too 
well. We tried but I couldn't get through. When we 
walked out, finally got out of the building, I didn't 



B. BADILLO 

know we were outside of the building, because it was 
completely dark. Next thing I know I heard a loud slam 
and a girl screaming. When I looked back, it was a 
girl from one of the private ambulance companies 
jumping out the back door of her ambulance, screaming, 
really scared. At this point I was scared. I freaked 
out for a brief moment. I guess anybody would. 

Q. Right. 

A. But I came to my senses pretty quickly. I 
was like I really have to calm down and get out of 
here. So this girl pulls me and an officer and she 
says oh, please come and check on my partner. He is 
sitting in the front. I don't know what happened to 
him, but he is laying on the side. We went to go check 
on him and he was just really badly burned. It was 
obvious that he was dead. Nothing we could do, so we 
kept on walking. 

We kept on walking south towards Battery 
Park. On the way, I don't know how much time had 
passed before the second collapse, but we kept -- I was 
okay physically. At this point, I was breathing better 
and I could actually see my way around. I got on the 
radio. I was screaming for my partner, you know, I 
tried to go in there and look for him, but it was too 



B. BADILLO 

dark. There was even more debris where he was at. I 
started screaming his name, but there was nothing I 
could do. So I just kept walking. 

On the way down, we just kept running into 
some people. We all got on one of the big MTA busses, 
the city busses and for some reason or another, we 
didn't get kicked out, but somebody said we got to get 
out of the bus or whatever. So we got out the bus. I 
held this girl close to me to make sure she was okay, 
because she was in bad shape. We were helping some 
people out. There were a lot of people with broken 
arms and legs, so we were trying to help them out the 
best we could. A lot of confusion, you know. I really 
didn't know what to do next. There was no direction. 
There was nobody telling you what to do. Everything 
was destroyed. 

The first thought on my mind is where is the 
train station, so I can get the hell out of here and go 
home. But then again, I knew I couldn't go home, so 
then I remember seeing a command car driving around and 
there was a Chief and a Lieutenant and an EMT in 
there. I forget the Chief's name. It was Mark 
Steffens, Chief Mark Steffens. The Lieutenant. I 
always have a hard time with his name. But he was one 



B. BADILLO 

of my original instructors. I don't even remember 
anybody else's name. 

They told me to get inside the vehicle and 
about two minutes later, we made a U turn heading 
south, because he was coming up north and then he made 
a U turn going south again, down towards Battery Park, 
and I could hear the second rumble and I already knew 
what it was. I knew it was the second building 
collapsing . 

I just started screaming inside the vehicle. 
I was like get the -- you know, get out of here. Let's 
go, let's go. He was doing his best, but there were 
people running all over the place. You can't run 
people over. 

We made it down to Battery Park. We are 
looking outside the windows and you could see all the 
ashes and debris and all kinds of stuff just going all 
the way down. It looked like, from what I have seen on 
TV, you know, when volcanos erupt and the ashes go all 
over the place and it is raining and snowing ashes. It 
looked like that. It was very very scary. 

People were hiding at the -- taking cover, 
shelter by the fort down there or something. There is 
something down there near Battery Park. That's where a 



10 



B. BADILLO 



lot of people retreated to. We were down there for 
about an hour or two afterwards. 

When it cleared out, we were helping people 
evacuate on the boats, going to Jersey. I was asking 
anyone if they have seen my partner. I remember Karen 
Lamanna from Battalion 14, she said that she had saw 

another ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^H 



After that, we kind of just hung out down 
there for a while. We got everybody out. We moved 
over to the Staten Island Ferry, where all the people 
load up to take the ferry and stuff. That was pretty 
much the rest of the day there. I stayed there for 
about two hours and then I managed to sneak away. They 
didn't want me leaving, but I was covered in dust. I 
couldn't breathe very well. I was spitting up a lot of 
black stuff, junky stuff. 

So I snuck away with -- I saw Mike Kenna, who 
is also an EMT here and Charlie Vitale. I snuck away 



11 

B. BADILLO 



with them just looking around. We were walking around, 
we just like -- I don't remember exactly what streets 
we took, but I know we went around the whole World 
Trade Center. This little square. 

You could see -- I don't know which tower was 
it. I think it was the north tower, we saw the north 
tower, just like what was left of it, just burning and 
a lot of fire. There was ashes everywhere, 
everywhere. I don't know how far this thing went, but 
it was really bad. 

Walking around, we came out to Rector 
Street. We saw one of the landing gears from the 
airplane. I was trying to look for my vehicle, because 
by this time it had cleared up a lot, so you could see 
a lot. I was trying to figure out where exactly I 
was. I couldn't find my vehicle. I mean everything 
was destroyed. I can't say it enough. 

We walked around. I kept running into 
people. I ran into Felix Hernandez, another EMT here 
at the Battalion. There was a lot of people. I saw 
the Chief of EMS, Robert McCracken. He was telling us 
to retreat back to the triage area at the Staten Island 
Ferry, but I didn't listen. I just kept walking 
around. Like I knew what just happened, what was going 



12 
B. BADILLO 



on, but I felt very confused, lost. It was a bad 
feeling. I just didn't know my way. 

At this point, okay, we are still walking 
around and we are just running into a lot of body parts 
and we ran into a person's torso, just no legs, no 
head, no arms, nothing, just chest and stomach area. 
We were tagging body parts, whatever we could find. 

Then like 15 feet away I found a head to go 
to the torso. I don't mean to be so graphic, but I 
would just like to describe whatever I saw. It was 
just the brains hanging out of the skull, just 
completely flapping over, like you just opened up a can 
or something like that. Out of curiosity, I don't know 
why, but I just put on a pair of gloves and I picked it 
up. I just started moving it around and you could see 
the face and everything, but it was all crushed and 
everything, no facial bones, no eyes, nothing, so we 
tagged it and we went along. 

By this time the Chief found me, he caught up 
to me and said get back to -- I was like, okay. By 
that time, later on, a few hours later, back at the 
ferry, I found out that Eddie was taken to New Jersey 
Medical Center or something like that, that he was 
going to be okay and so that was a little -- and I had 



13 
B. BADILLO 



gotten in contact with some of my family members. They 
were really nervous . 

I just wanted to make sure everybody was 
home, my son. I called him up. Kids don't know any 
better. I just wanted to make sure he was okay. I 
stayed there until about 11 o'clock at night. I got a 
ride back to the Bronx and right back here to the 
Battalion. It was a really rough, long day and I was 
really stressed out. 

I'm walking into the door and people are just 
looking at me like whatever, I just got out of a war 
zone or something. I was literally covered from head 
to toe. It was in my underwear, it was in my shirt, in 
any my ears, everywhere. So I looked pretty bad. 

I jumped in my car and I went home. My 
fiance, I live with my fiance. She was pretty good. I 
started watching the news and I saw the planes hitting 
the towers. I didn't know it was like the worst part 
of the whole day. I couldn't believe they actually got 
that on camera and I couldn't believe just seeing it. 

Then I got some more bad news the next day. 
That was pretty much the end of the day after that. I 
didn't want to come to work the next day, but being 
that I was physically okay, they made me come for 



14 
B. BADILLO 



another 12 hours, which is all right. 

The next day I just heard that one of the 
firefighters who used to be an EMT, Hector Tirado, was 
missing, and pretty much considered dead at this 
point. Then another good friend of mine, she was an 
EMT for St. Barnabas, Imelda Reno. I found out that 
she was confirmed dead. That really hurt a lot. 
Because I knew Imelda for quite a few years. She was 
really a nice young lady. 

Lieutenant (inaudible), he saw I was kind of 
disturbed by all this. He put us out of service and he 
suggested that I go talk to a psychiatrist at Jacobi 
emergency room. I took a few days off. I mean I came 
in, but I just kind of hung out at the station. 

I didn't want to be bothered with doing 911 
calls or nothing, nothing. I just didn't want to do 
it. I felt pretty good, but it just kept coming back. 
I was having trouble sleeping. To this point I feel 
pretty good. I don't think about it as much. 

I guess I don't know if it's from the World 
Trade Center events, but I still have some trouble 
sleeping. I have spoken to some counselor, 
psychiatrist. It helped a lot to see that my partner 
was alive and okay. So thank God for that. 



15 
B. BADILLO 



That was pretty much it. The things I saw 
and felt. 

Q. Okay. When you guys first got in to Liberty 
and West, it was about up here that you had parked the 
bus somewhere? 

A. Right by here somewhere. 

Q. Do you know where the triage area that Eddie 
was headed for was? 

A. I heard it was Church and Vesey, but Vesey is 
up here. I don't know how -- I know Eddie walked 
between the two buildings . 

Q. He went into the plaza itself? 

A. Yes, the plaza itself. That's the last 
-- that's the last -- that's where he was headed, but 
I don't know. Vesey is kind of far up here. Where is 
Church? Yes, Vesey and Church. I don't know if they 
had another triage area in the plaza itself, because 
there were a lot of vehicles parked around the 
buildings and the towers and stuff. That's the last I 
saw or heard. 

Q. Okay. Anything else you would like to add? 

A. No, I just thank God I'm here to tell the 
story. It was the scariest thing I have ever seen in 
my life. I never imagined to be involved. Like I said 



16 
B. BADILLO 



earlier, you sit at home, you watch these horrible 
stories on TV and you read about them in the newspaper, 
so many deaths, so many lives destroyed and to actually 
feel like -- that I'm a part of history you know. 

I just can't believe that I was there. I 
couldn't believe that I was there. To this day I still 
can't believe it. Other than that, I'm doing pretty 
good these days. Trying to get everything back on 
track . 

MR. RADENBERG: Good. Okay. Thank you. The 

time is now 1434. This is the conclusion of the 

interview. 



File No. 9110496 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

PARAMEDIC CAMILLE MARRONCELLI 

Interview Date: January 24, 2002 



Transcribed by Elisabeth F. Nason 



C. MARRONCELLI 

MR. RADENBERG: Today is January 24, 2002. 

I'm Paul Radenberg of the Fire Department's World 

Trade Center Task Force. I'm currently at EMS 

Battalion 20. The time is now 1534. 

Q. I'm conducting an interview with -- 

A. Paramedic Camille Marroncelli, Battalion 20. 

Q. This interview is regarding the events of 
September 11, 2001. Could you begin with when you were 
assigned . 

A. Actually, we were assigned -- we got on to 
the West Side Highway as the second plane hit the 
second tower. We had just gotten on to the West Side 
Highway from the Cross Bronx and my partner was -- he 
was monitoring the radio. I was trying to get through 
traffic going down there. He said a second plane hit 
the second tower. We hit a lot of traffic going down 
there so we were delayed. Our response time was 
delayed . 

We finally arrived down there and we took 
West Street going down. It was clear, the West Side 
Highway was cleared from, I think it was 79 Street when 
they shut it down, so we were clear all the way down, 
going straight on down. As soon as you could see the 
towers from the highway, as soon as we could -- we got 



C. MARRONCELLI 

them in our eyesight, we could see that they were both 
burning. We kind of both wondered what we were driving 
into at that point. 

We got down, like I said, we went down West 
Street and we got down as far as, I'm not sure, we were 
probably around maybe 6, 7 blocks from the towers. I 
don't know exactly the cross street location that we 
were at, but there were maybe 10 ambulances down there 
before us, but most of them were Metro Care units and 
Hatzolah units were down there. There was maybe two or 
three other Fire Department EMS units down there. 

There were no Lieutenants, no bosses, we 
couldn't find anybody. We pulled up right where all 
the other ambulances were. Unfortunately, they were 
all facing the towers. I thought it was kind of odd 
that they would be facing the disaster. In the event 
that we had to get out, they had no egress. 

Finally one of the bosses pulled up. I don't 
even remember what his name was. We were trying to get 
organized and he asked who was the senior person. It 
happened to be me there. I have a lot of years on the 
job. He stated to me that you are in charge of staging 
and triage. I said okay, fine. I had done some mock 
drills when I had been a boss in '95 in Manhattan and I 



C. MARRONCELLI 

had no problem with taking command of staging. 

I just directed all the units to get in the 
vehicles and turn them around so we would be facing 
away from the towers. We were in the process of doing 
this and that's when the first building came down. 
Most of the people that were in the ambulances trying 
to move them just continued driving up West Street. I 
was on foot. 

I jumped into the back of a Metro Care 
ambulance, as a matter of fact, and directed the driver 
to just drive, but what happened at that point was that 
the cloud that came up West Street, it just engulfed 
the vehicle, so we had to stop. Unfortunately for me, 
they left me in the vehicle. Everybody was scared. It 
was just everybody was so frightened, it was like 
survival of the fittest at that point. 

When I was able to finally get out of the 
vehicle, you still couldn't see, because it hadn't 
dissipated that much. It kind of like shuffled along 
until this cloud dissipated and you kind of jumped into 
action, because it was pretty hard to miss a paramedic 
on the back of your uniform. Everybody was coughing 
and couldn't see. I kind of sort of directed people to 
the ambulance units that were there. I directed them 



C. MARRONCELLI 

to get all their sterile water, take it out and kind of 
showed some of the people how to irrigate their eyes 
and stuff and gave people direction, tried to elicit 
bystanders to help and so on and so forth. 

I had to separate from my partner. I don't 
know where he went. We were just like -- everybody was 
in a fog at that point. Maybe 5 minutes had passed and 
I got my partner and we were trying to make some 
semblance of order. Look for a supervisor, find out 
what was going on, what we needed to do, where we 
needed to be. 

Shortly after the first building came down, 
the second building collapsed, but at that point we 
were further up West Street, because we had moved from 
the first collapse, so we did the same thing. We got 
into the ambulance and we drove further up West 
Street. I don't know. We were there. It was just a 
lot of -- it was madness, it was confusion and it was 
-- I'm sorry, because it's -- 

We were directed at that point, not really at 
that point, but a while later, because there was just 
nobody to kind of give us orders where to go. When 
things settled a little bit they directed everybody to 
go to Chelsea Piers. So all the units went up there 



C. MARRONCELLI 

and that's when they -- I mean we sat there. We sat 
there and we didn't do anything because there was no 
way for anybody to do anything. We couldn't near the 
buildings, we couldn't get near the rubble because of 
the smoke and the fire and everything else that was 
going on, so we just -- it was just a feeling of 
feeling helpless at that point. 

Everybody was eager to do stuff, but there 
was nothing really to do on our end. From what I 
understand from speaking with people afterwards, people 
who were on the other end had transported patients and 
so on and so forth, but we didn't have any patients 
until very much later on, when we transported some 
firefighters, but that was not until like when the 
third building fell, which was way later on. 

Q. About 5 o'clock? 

A. Yes. 5 o'clock. It was in the evening, but 
from the point that the second tower collapsed until 
that point, we were down in Chelsea Piers. I mean they 
brought us into -- near Stuyvesant High School. I 
don't remember what time it was. Maybe sometime in the 
afternoon they brought us down there and they made us 
sit there in case we needed to -- as I said, we wound 
up transporting 5 firefighters. They had minor 



C. MARRONCELLI 

injuries. 

I don't know what else to tell you other than 
that it was very unorganized and it didn't get 
organized even into the evening over there with who was 
going to do what and how they were going to transport 
the patients and any kind of organization. They said 
set up Chelsea Piers at that point as a disaster area 
and it was like a mock hospital and they had everything 
and anything you needed in there, but still it wasn't 
being utilized, because we couldn't get anybody out 
from the towers and what not. 

Other than that, I don't know what else I 
could tell you that would be helpful with regard to 
what happened. I'm probably missing stuff because I'm 
not -- maybe there is stuff that I don't want to 
remember. I don't know. It was -- as time goes on -- 
it's been what, almost 4 months now. 
Q. 4 and a half months. 

A. 4 and a half months now, but it's still very 
hard to talk about it, because it's just -- especially 
with people on this job that have -- I don't know. I 
was born and raised in New York and I grew up when they 
were building the towers. We used to travel to Staten 
Island when I was a kid and we used to take the FDR 



C. MARRONCELLI 

Drive down to where the ferry is and that's where we 
used to take the ferry and as a kid I grew up with 
watching these things being built. 

Just the whole idea of those things coming 
down, it's still to this day it's very disturbing. 
It's still pretty -- I mean I know it happened, but 
when I go down to the city, it seems like almost like 
you are in a dream. I'm in a dream when I see that 
they are not there. So to talk about it is difficult. 
I never thought that I would be a part of such a bad 
part of history in this country. 

I mean on the job, it ' s a hard job sometimes, 
and I'm part of a lot of the things that happened 
because I help people. That's a good thing. Maybe I 
was able to help somebody. That's good. But to be 
there and to not have been able to do anything because 
of the situation, it was very disheartening, because 
you train for a long time to be there at a time when 
you are most needed in a disaster. 

Unfortunately it was beyond anybody's 
control, what you could and couldn't do. I have been 
to all these drills and it's just very different when 
it's real. It's just everybody, like everything goes 
out the window and people just -- I mean because of the 



C. MARRONCELLI 



extent of that catastrophe, how big it was, there were 
just so many people that couldn't make any sense of it, 
let alone act. It was just -- mentally and emotionally 
it was that disturbing, that it was so hard to kind of 
like get your thoughts together. 

You react because it's second nature on this 
job and that's the only reason why people -- a lot of 
people rose to the occasion, because it is second 
nature. If you stood there and really had to think 
about what you had to do, you would have been more 
paralyzed than you were, because that's the time to act 
and not contemplate. Later on it's going to really 
kind of -- you contemplate it and it just becomes very 
disturbing; all the images and the images that we saw 
when we got down there; people jumping out of the 
building and it just seemed very unreal, but it wasn't, 
unfortunately. It wasn't unreal. 

Q. Who were you working with that day? 

A. I was working with Richie Natal. 

Q. Is he an EMT? 

A. He ' s a paramedic. 

Q. When you first got down in the area, you said 
you were like about 6 blocks north of the Center on the 
west side. Do you remember what, aside from the 



10 
C. MARRONCELLI 



ambulances, do you remember any other buildings that 
were around there, that might be like a landmark? 

A. No, no. All I saw were ambulances and fire 
trucks and apparatus and police cars and that's all I 
was like concentrating on, with all that excitement, 
because you get very caught up in the adrenaline. You 
just get very caught up with what is going on. Things 
that aren't really -- and I guess it was, things on the 
periphery really weren't important, because you had 
these two huge structures in front of you that were 
just -- that's where your eyes were. All eyes were on 
those buildings. You just couldn't take your eyes off 
those buildings. So whatever was around me, I really 
couldn't tell you. 

Q. The other Department ambulances that were in 
the area, did you recognize anybody that was part of 
the crews from those units? 

A. From the voluntaries? 

Q. No, from the Department, the EMS ambulances. 

A. Yes, there was one of the Battalion 15 
units. I think it was 15 Boy was there. There was 
another medic unit there, but I don't remember who they 
were. I don't remember them at all. They might have 
been from Queens or something, but there was definitely 



11 

C. MARRONCELLI 



another -- because a lot of people from the station 
were assigned. Maybe we were one of the first arriving 
units down there because we volunteered. 

My partner Richie is a bit of a buff. He was 
like let's go, let's go. I was like all right, let's 
go. Not to think that it would be something as 
catastrophic as this. A lot of Jacobi units were 
there. As I said, the only one that I recognized was 
this other unit, 15 Boy. It is an EMT unit. 

Q. The Lieutenant that arrived there, you said 
you didn't recognize him at all? 

A. No, I don't remember who it was. 

Q. Any idea where he went after he put you in 
charge of staging and triage? 

A. I have no idea. It was just, it seemed like, 
because there was so much to do, because everybody was 
just running around like chickens without heads. There 
was no semblance of order. It was trying to get people 
to -- a group of people to do the same thing for the 
same purpose, because it was very hard to get people 
organized. 

They kind of parked their vehicles there and 
I don't know where they went, these people, so we had 
to get them to like -- because you couldn't move this 



12 
C. MARRONCELLI 



vehicle unless this vehicle was -- do you know what I'm 
saying? So we are trying to get everybody to move 
their vehicles. 

Q. All blocked in? 

A. Yes. They were all facing the towers. If we 
had patients, we need to be going in the other 
direction. But no, I don't know where he went. He had 
his hands full, as did everybody else at that point in 
time. 

Q. Anything else you would like to add? 

A. No, other than I don't know, I think that 
there are a lot of the EMTs and paramedics that were 
down there were -- had every good intention. This is 
what we go to school for. This is what we train for, 
to take care of the sick and injured, and 
unfortunately, we were utilized, but not to the effect 
that we wanted to be, because circumstances that were 
beyond our control, but we were there ready and willing 
to serve and I think that for myself, being down there 
as early as I was and seeing the whole thing transpire 
before my eyes, if we could have done more, we would 
have. 

I think that a lot of times we are just not 
given the credit. Just being there and having to 



13 
C. MARRONCELLI 



experience something like that. People should get 
credit for that. Nobody should have to see something 
like that in their lifetime. It doesn't leave you. It 
stays with you. Hopefully people use it in a good 
way. Something good could come out of this, the way 
people view things, then it wasn't all in vain. 

Unfortunately we lost a lot of people, the 
Department lost a lot of people and the world in 
general lost a lot with that event. Especially the 
people in New York. Especially people that are native 
New Yorkers, that grew up in the city and feel like 
they helped to make the city what it is today. 

So it's part of like your -- it's your home. 
You feel like you were violated. You take it 
personally. I took it personally. I think a lot of 
people that don't live in New York that feel as they do 
for the city. There is a lot of people that work for 
the city. Civil servants. Obviously we love our jobs, 
because it's not the best paying job in the world, but 
there is more to jobs than being the best paying job in 
the world and when you are a civil servant in New York, 
I mean there are a lot of people in New York that you 
have to take care of. 

That's part of what I guess the love for the 



14 
C. MARRONCELLI 



city is, just being there to do what you are supposed 
to do when you are called upon. I think everybody that 
was from this Department, from EMS did their job and a 
lot of people did above and beyond their jobs. 

MR. RADENBERG: Time is now 1554. This will 
be the conclusion of the interview. 



File No. 9110507 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 

MR. ANTHONY DeMAIO 

Interview Date: January 28, 2002 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



A. DeMAIO 2 

MR. FEILER: Today's date is January 

28th, 2002. The time now is 944 hours. 

This is Lieutenant Monty Feiler with the 

Fire Department of the City of New York. 

I'm conducting an interview with the 

following individual. 

Please state your name, rank and 

assigned area. 

MR. DeMAIO: Anthony DeMaio, assistant 

deputy director, fleet services, 58th 

Street. 

MR. FEILER: Of the Fire Department of 

the City of New York. We're interviewing 

him regarding the events of September 11th, 

2001. Also present for the interview is 

Investigator Fabiola Quevedo. 

Q. You can go ahead and begin on the 
morning of September 11th, how you first became 
aware and what your actions were that morning. 

A. Like work any other day here. It's a 
shop. I actually had left the building. I think 
I ran up to the post office and came back. On 
the way back from the post office, I saw there 
was smoke coming from one of the towers. When I 



A. DeMAIO 3 

reached the shop, at that point no one knew what 
was going on, although it seemed like an 
accident . 

Most of the guys, most of the 
supervisors, were already up on the roof so they 
had a clear view of what was going on. I 
proceeded up to the roof. At this point we 
didn't know what was really happening, although 
it looked like an airplane or something struck 
the building. 

I came back downstairs. At that point 
it was on TV. They had the TV on in the 
supervisors' room. At that point we didn't 
receive any call yet from our boss. 
Q. About what time was that? 
A. This was right after that first plane 
hit the first tower. 

I came down here from upstairs. At 
this point when I was down here -- as soon as I 
made it downstairs to find out what was going on, 
what we were doing, the second plane hit the 
building, the second building. 

Sometime in the next couple minutes we 
got a call from the control room over at 34th 



A. DeMAIO t 

Street. That's when Tom McDonald, our boss, he 
requested that we all report to the area. 
Normally we do that on a fourth alarm duty or 
major accidents. In a major incident, one of us 
from either side, depending who was involved, 
responds. In this case he requested us all down 
there. 

Me and Mike Felice, my boss, Mike 
Felice, left here, headed into Manhattan, which 
was -- everything was jammed up. We took the 
Midtown Tunnel. As a matter of fact, as we're 
going into the tunnel, there was four -- we were 
trying to follow a police car down into the 
tunnel. There were four firefighters on foot -- 
they couldn't go any further with their personal 
car, because everyone was told to report down 
there -- which we picked up and got them into 
lower Manhattan. 

We dropped them off. We get down to 
West Street. We were pretty far down West 
Street, as a matter of fact. 

Q. Do you know where you dropped off the 
firefighters? 

A. The firefighter was on -- if I'm not 



A. DeMAIO 5 

mistaken, it was on Broadway. As we were coming 
down, I think on Broadway. Broadway comes down; 
right? 

Q. Yeah. 

A. Yeah, it was on Broadway somewhere. He 
was not completely downtown. It was somewhere in 
the teens, I believe. We ended up dropping them 
all off at that point, because one of the guy's 
firehouses was there and then from there they 
all -- 

Q. Do you know their names? 

A. No. I didn't know who they were. We 
just knew they were firefighters, because they 
were asking police in front of us for a lift. 
They couldn't go any further, and we ended up 
taking them. 

I think when we pulled up it looked 
pretty far down. We were probably parked around 
I think it was Murray or Warren when we pulled up 
to the scene. At that point when we got out of 
the car, we realized that the first tower went 
down. There was no tower there. We already 
realized that something happened. 

We were trying to raise our other 



A. DeMAIO 6 

halves from 34th Street on the radio. No 
response. When the tower came down, we knew that 
they were there before us. We were starting to 
get a little concerned. There was no response. 
Communications were down. We weren't able to 
communicate with any of our mechanics. We 
weren't able to communicate back to the shop. 

So we're starting towards the scene. 
It had to be maybe -- we were practically 
underneath it. We were on the other side of the 
pedestrian bridge. Definitely we were on the 
other side of the bridge. All of a sudden -- 
yeah, we were, because the pedestrian bridge goes 
over to the high school. 

That's when we heard the rumble. We 
looked up, and the second tower was coming down. 
We turned around. We run out of here. I lose my 
boss. I couldn't find him for a while. I 
continued running north. Then after a while 
everything started to settle down, I started to 
work my way back. 

At this point now -- we still couldn't 
find anybody. Now I even lost Mike. I couldn't 
find him. What happened was Mike had ducked into 



A. DeMAIO 7 

the high school. That's why I knew where we 
were, because we were already past that bridge. 
When he ran back, he saw someone had made it into 
the high school, and he ducked into the high 
school. I didn't notice that. I just continued 
going up. 

After everything settled down a little 
bit, some of the dust settled down, we started to 
work our way back again. At this point we found 
McDonald, Tom McDonald. He was all covered in 
soot and dust. He was all right. A few minutes 
later we ran into the other guys we were looking 
for: Tom Curty, Andy Diamond, I think Lou 
Morbelli was with them also. They were there 
actually before the first tower came down. They 
were there before we were. 

Basically that was it up to the point 
where the tower came down. Then it was just like 
trying to find where everybody was. We didn't 
know where all our guys were. We knew there were 
a lot of guys down there, a lot of the guys from 
the emergency trucks respond. We spent a good 
time just making sure we found where they were 
and they were okay. 



A. DeMAIO 8 

Then we just started to go through -- 
everything started to settle down, and we started 
to go through the place and try to make sense of 
everything. It was (inaudible). 

Q. Where do you think you were at that 
point? 

A. Most of the time after the building 
came down, we were probably underneath the 
pedestrian bridge, in that area. 

Q. On West Street? 

A. Yeah, on West Street. That's where 
they set up the command post. 

Q. Oh, okay. 

A. Once it was a little -- after a couple 
hours when everything started to settle down, we 
started to -- actually before that we did a 
walk -- we did a search. We searched through one 
side. We came like through the Merrill Lynch 
building, I guess -- no, the exchange, American 
Express building, which was across from the 
towers. We walked around through the back of 
that. 

When we came up on -- over here 
somewhere. It was actually -- I forget the name 



A. DeMAIO 9 

of the street. North End? 

Q. Had the second building collapsed yet? 
A. Yeah. No, what happened, like I said, 
we were walking towards the scene. That's when 
we heard the rumbling and the second building 
started coming down. That's when we ran. 

Q. So you got there after the first 
building collapsed? 

A. Yes, after the first building collapsed 
and just prior to the second building coming 
down. 

Basically what we normally do at any 
operation, normal operation, is make sure that 
the apparatus is fueled, make sure that 
everything is running, there was no problems 
mechanically on it, whether it's apparatus or 
ambulances or whatever it is. 

But in this case we had apparatus that 
was totally destroyed, partially destroyed, 
abandoned. We spent the next week basically 
trying to salvage anything that we thought was 
salvageable that we could kickback into service. 

Our concern was that we lost so many 
pieces that if there's anything here that we can 



A. DeMAIO 10 

get back into service, you know, get it back to 
the shop, get it cleaned up, get it working, and 
get it back to the house, at least they'll have 
something, because there was a lot of pieces 
gone. 

That's what we spent the next week 
doing, basically, is finding apparatus that was 
abandoned, getting them to run. Most of them had 
all the glass blown out of them, full of soot, 
dust and debris. Getting it back to the shop. 
Same thing with ambulances. 

Then we tried to make -- we kept a 
running log of what we found along the way that 
was beyond repair. We were pulling them into the 
shop whatever possible so we could keep track of 
at least what we had. 

Basically that's what we did. 

Q. Is there anything else you think is 
important? 

A. That's it. 

Q. On behalf of the department, I want to 
thank you. 

MR. FEILER: We'll conclude the 

interview at 953 hours. 



File No. 9110511 



WORLD TRADE CENTER TASK FORCE INTERVIEW 
LIEUTENANT HOWARD HAHN 
Interview Date: February 1, 2002 



Transcribed by Laurie A. Collins 



H. HAHN 2 

MR. FEILER: Today's date is February 
1st, 2002. The time now is 936 hours. This 
is Monty Feiler of the Fire Department of 
the City of New York. I'm conducting an 
interview with the following individual. 

Please state your name, rank and 
assigned command. 

MR. FEILER: Lieutenant Hahn of 
Battalion 50. 

LIEUTENANT HAHN: Of the New York City 
Fire Department. We're conducting an 
interview in the Division 4 conference room 
regarding the events of September 11th, 
2001. Also present is -- 

MS. MAGGI: Diana Maggi. 
MR. FEILER: Of the Bureau of 
Investigations and Trials. 
Q. What I'd like you to do is if you can 
just relate a scenario of what happened on the 
morning of September 11th, how you became 
involved, and go up to the second building 
collapse. 

A. I heard the initial crash over my 
scanner. I contacted Captain Sickles of 



H. HAHN • 

Battalion 45. That day I was detailed to 
Battalion 45 as their conditions car. I went 
back to the battalion. I picked up Captain 
Sickles. He was on the phone with citywide. 
They told us to respond in to the scene. 

We responded down to the staging area, 
which was at that time Vesey and West. Upon 
arrival I parked my car near north and Vesey. I 
went directly to the treatment area or triage 
area at 3 World Financial Center, American 
Express building. Captain Sickles went over to 
the command post or proceeded to the command 
post . 

We started having a treatment area 
outside the American Express building. After 
approximately 10 or 15 minutes we felt that it 
was safer to go inside the American Express 
building, which we did. 

About 10 to 15 minutes after we were 
inside the building, the first tower came down. 
At that point we moved towards the rear of the 
building, and then someone started telling us 
there's a possibility of a gas leak. So we 
started moving north along West Street, north 



H. HAHN 4 

towards I guess Murray Street, when the second 
building started coming down. 

At that point we started -- everything 
basically became chaos. Everyone went left, 
right. There was no control at all. Most of the 
equipment was left in the American Express 
building around the streets there. 

After the second building settled, I 
heard over the radio that they were setting up a 
command post at West and Vesey, with that, I 
proceeded over to that area, and I started taking 
instructions from the -- I think at that time it 
was Chief Goldfarb. 

Q. When you first heard the initial 
incident over your scanner, were you on duty? 

A. I was on duty as conditions 45 that 
morning. 

Q. You said you called -- 

A. I called Captain Sickles and advised 
him that I heard this on the scanner. I know he 
has a scanner too. He told me to respond back to 
the battalion. I know he got on the phone with 
the tour commander, who apparently I guess 
instructed us to go directly into the scene. 



H. HAHN 



Q. Captain Sickles went with you? 

A. Yes. 

Q. In your command car? 

A. Correct. 

Q. At any time were you given any 
instruction over the radio or telephone where to 
respond to? 

A. Over the radio we heard staging was set 
up at Vesey and West. 

Q. You responded after the first building 
was struck but before the second building? 

A. Correct. 

Q. What route did you take down there? 

A. We went through the tunnel, FDR Drive. 
We got off at I guess it was the Manhattan 
Bridge, because traffic started backing up. We 
started proceeding through I guess the Village or 
whatever it is down there, on the streets. 

Q. Did you get any further instruction on 
the radio? 

A. No. 

Q. Did you stay on Queens or citywide? 

A. At that time we were on citywide. 

Q. When you got into the area, where did 



H. HAHN 6 

you park your vehicle? 

A. When I got there I parked on Vesey 
Street close to North End. 

Q. By that time was the second building 
hit? 

A. Most probably. I don't know the exact 
time. I think it was probably already hit. 

Q. Then you made your way over to the 
American Express building? 

A. I made my way over to the American 
Express building where Captain Pinkus was the 
command officer of that area. 

Q. Did you see any other EMS people? 

A. There were approximately -- at that 
time when I arrived there were at least eight 
units with stretchers and equipment at the 
American Express. There were numerous units 
already at the scene. 

Q. Did you know any of them? 

A. I'm trying to think. I know there was 
a unit from Roosevelt Hospital. I think it was 9 
Boy. There was at least one Hazollah unit, with 
two ALS, maybe a city unit. I'm sure exactly. 
There were at least eight units on the scene with 



H. HAHN 7 

their stretchers and equipment by the American 
Express building. 

Q. You were able to set up patient care or 
triage? 

A. We set up basically -- were setting up 
triage and patient care, that area. Then we 
started to move it inside the building as a 
safety zone. So we were inside the building 
approximately five, ten minutes before the first 
building came down. 

Q. What happened when the building came 
down? 

A. Well, when the first building -- 
originally we set up at the front of the 
building, just inside, so if we saw anybody 
coming we could get them inside. When the first 
building came down, we moved towards the rear of 
the building closer towards -- the furthest, 
towards Four World Financial, this area over 
here, back of the American Express building. 

Then they were talking about possible 
gas leaks and so on, so we moved out of the 
building and we moved to some other buildings 
along I guess it was North End Avenue. There's I 



H. HAHN 8 

know a school there that we went to. Then they 
evacuated that area because they were worried 
about gas leaks. We started moving all the way 
up, going up West Street. 

Q. You stayed with Captain Sickles? 

A. At that point -- no, Captain Sickles 
went originally to the command post. I was with 
Captain -- Jace -- Captain Pinkus. Chief 
Carrasquillo came in at one point, and we started 
running around. Then at that point it really 
became chaos and there was total loss of control. 

Q. That's when the second building 
collapsed? 

A. No, we basically were towards the rear 
of the American Express building I think more 
here when the second building came down. Then we 
started running. We were down near Vesey and 
West Street or Vesey and North End when the 
second building came down, but we were inside 
both times. 

Q. Did you see any patients at that time? 

A. There were no real patients coming to 
us. We had a couple patients that were full of 
dirt and stuff, so when the first building came 



H. HAHN 9 

down we got inside, but at that point they really 
refused treatment, those patients. 

Q. Your command car stayed -- 

A. My command car originally stayed at 
West and Vesey. As a hole cleared up, I moved it 
up. I was able to get around, and I moved it up 
to the command post. Then I went off to do other 
triage areas and so on. Captain Sickles gave the 
keys to my command car to Dr. -- the one who's in 
charge overall from the Fire Department. The one 
who took over Giordano's spot or whatever. 

Q. John Clair? 

A. John Clair. He gave my keys to the 
command car to John Clair. He took off for 
wherever, and I didn't see the car for two days, 
and my equipment was in it. 

Q. Is there anything else that you think 
is important? Any recollections you want to 
share? 

A. It was a hell of a day. Initially the 
first three hours (inaudible). 

Q. Were you ever able to use your radio or 
your cell phone? 

A. My cell phone on and off I believe I 



H. HAHN 10 

was able to use. 

Q. How about the department radio? 

A. Yeah, I was able to get through, but 
the transmissions was very hard. It was very 
hard to control. You're doing basically your own 
show. 

Q. Anything else you'd like to add? No? 
Okay. In that case, we want to thank you for 
your cooperation? 

MR. FEILER: The time now is 945 hours, 

and this concludes the interview. 



